

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[Centre for Evidence and Criminal Justice Studies, ]]]

[[[School of Law]]]

[[[, ]]]

[[[Northumbria]]]

[[[ University ]]]

[[[(FSS022)]]]1. This memorandum has been written by two members of the School of Law, Professor TJ Wilson and Dr M Stockdale, and two Home Office Forensic Pathologists, Dr W Lawler, Newcastle forensic pathology practice, and Dr S Leadbeatter, Cardiff University School of Medicine.Introduction2. The continuing achievements and innovative qualities of forensic science in this country mask the difficult and complex foundations for the use of science (including clinical science) and allied disciplines (e.g. fingerprint comparison) in the service of justice. The time interval for collecting or recording evidence may be brief. Vital work may be undertaken in uncontrolled conditions. The collection of evidence may be a destructive action, with - in some disciplines - little or no opportunity, as in conventional science, for replication. A broad range of knowledge gained from different forensic science disciplines, medico-legal skills and other expert opinion evidence may need to be shared before individual experts can make reliable and pertinent contributions to criminal investigations and prosecutions. There is potential for institutional bias where provision is in-house. This may also limit the availability to the defence of equivalent experts. Ultimately the courts need to be able to resolve disputes about the admissibility and reliability of evidence tendered by a variety of expert witnesses. A significant proportion of scientific or expert evidence, notably fingerprint comparison, may come from disciplines outside what is traditionally understood by the term forensic science. It may be produced sometimes within institutions or by individuals whose primary role or discipline is unconnected with the CJS.3. The exchange of information between experts in different disciplines is increasingly precarious and some specialist areas of knowledge are so under resourced or numerically depleted that their continued availability cannot be taken for granted. This is not a criticism of the current pluralistic model for providing expert evidence (the variety of such evidence makes that inevitable), or necessarily a result of the marketization of forensic science, although some elements of the current funding and commissioning arrangements may have had unforeseen consequences, such as the loss sometimes of good contemporaneous evidence and professional deskilling. The key issue, however, is that market reform alone cannot ensure that sound expertise is available to the courts, whether criminal, coronial or civil. Statutory powers (extending to experts instructed by the defence and other jurisdictions) for the Regulator may be needed. Even that change may be insufficient. The time has come to consider institutional reform for commissioning research, ensuring medico-legal and scientific training for legal practitioners and other professionals involved full time or part-time in the CJS, and additional funding for the provision of scientific, clinical and other expert evidence.How are forensic science services procured by police forces and could procurement processes be improved?4. Police commissioning may take the view, where a death is not obviously suspicious, that a post mortem examination can be begun by a non-forensic histopathologist with later involvement of a forensic pathologist if concerns are raised by the former. There is a significant risk that the non-forensic histopathologist having no experience of, or insight into, trace evidence issues, and using dissection techniques which will raise difficulties in interpretation through the creation of artefact (if, in fact, there is any dissection of what might have been regarded by a forensic pathologist as a region pertinent to issues which might be raised by that death)  may fail to recognise subtle suspicious factors with the loss of opportunity for proper investigation and incorrect categorisation of the cause of death.5. The procurement of forensic medical examiners (police surgeons) and custody suite services from a single contractor may have an adverse impact on clinical evidence. There appears to have been a decline in the quality of information recorded during police custody as local doctors have been replaced by contractor’s staff. In the absence of precise information as close as possible to the time of arrest about the nature, extent and location of non-fatal injuries, it may be impossible to offer an opinion, for example, on whether the injuries could have been sustained as a result of an assault by a third party or might have been self-inflicted. There is a related problem, sometimes, with medical records received about an admission prior to death from A&amp;E departments. This is attributable to the inadequacy of the medico-legal content in undergraduate medical education.6. The police and CPS emphasis on “appropriate field of expertise”, with its insistence upon the separate involvement of a multiplicity of experts may result in the “deskilling” of professionals – many forensic pathologists no longer examine the brain or spinal cord, heart, bones or eyes in criminal cases – and in “fragmentation” of the forensic approach to the case as a whole. That is to say, an individual expert may misinterpret findings through inadequate contextualisation, thus misleading both the expert who gives an “overview of the case” – assuming that “deskilling” does not result in there being no longer an appropriately qualified expert to give such an “overview” – and, consequently, the CJS. (A similar problem has arisen in care proceedings. It is increasingly difficult to instruct a paediatrician with a sufficient width of knowledge and experience to provide a medical overview.) The expert practitioner must, however, be aware of the limitations of his or her professional knowledge. Where issues might become pivotal to a prosecution or defence case, a forensic pathologist may be required professionally to consult specialists to check provisional findings or commission further work.7. We suggest that it would be wrong to assume that all such issues (if many) could be addressed by procurement reform alone. We differ among ourselves as to the significance of the various manifestations of structural weaknesses within the medico-legal arrangements. We all believe, however, that institutional reform may be needed to resolve the following problems:What should be the role of the Forensic Science Regulator?8. The first office holder and his team have delivered a well judged programme of work undertaken in a timely manner. This has been developed through an inclusive and transparent partnership with a wide range of criminal justice institutions, forensic providers and (including through participation at several meetings convened by the Centre for Evidence and Criminal Justice Studies) individual criminal justice practitioners and academics.9. The key issue for the future may not be so much the nature of the Regulator’s role, but whether this model of regulation or current progress is sustainable. The Regulator’s codes are largely concerned with the standardisation of laboratory activities with the intention to cover crime scenes at a later date. This sequence reflected an understandable desire to ensure ‘a level playing field’ for the providers of traditional forensic science. Such activity has the advantage, however, of centralised locations, laboratory conditions and a scientific culture that aspires to standardisation. It goes with the grain of current police and government pro-market policies, and can be enforced by contractual compliance. It does, however, postpone greater challenges posed by scene recovery standardisation and fingerprint evidence. Both involve considerably more difficult working conditions, a greater number of organisations and may require changes within police culture. Without statutory powers the Regulator will have to rely on the cooperation of chief officers to ensure that reforms are introduced in a timely, effective, and comprehensive manner.10. The Regulator’s epistemological work and major inquiries into scientific failures have concentrated on DNA analysis –‘the gold standard’ - for forensic science. The most recent inquiry was concerned with the identification of principles on which a unified interpretation and reporting policy might be developed for complex DNA profiles. This is an internationally ambitious, innovative and much needed piece of work, but is also an example of knocking at an open door and in areas where there are no apparent institutional conflicts between standardisation and the combined interests of the police and the Government. Beyond this lies much greater uncertainty. If it is accepted that the Regulator should accredit a wider range of work and his remit allows this, at the minimum, he may require more resources and a broader range of expertise within his team in order to deal with a broader range of issues. This would be particularly the case with medico-legal investigations, be they for criminal, coronial or civil proceedings.Does the Government have an effective strategy for forensic science in the UK and is it sufficient to support forensic science R&amp;D and criminal justice? 11. The Government’s strategy may not reflect the range and complexity of problems arising in respect of forensic sciences. For example, at the time of writing the Government had not responded to the Law Commission’s proposal (2011) “that there should be a statutory admissibility test which would provide that an expert’s opinion evidence is admissible in criminal proceedings only if it is sufficiently reliable to be admitted. The Committee’s 2005 Report, Forensic Science on Trial was the catalyst for this work. It had concluded that “[T]he absence of an agreed protocol for the validation of scientific techniques prior to their being admitted in court [was] entirely unsatisfactory”  It hoped to see “an objective, clearly defined test to establish whether a theory or technique is sufficiently robust and evidence-based to merit admission in court” “, In its report, presented  to Parliament in 2011, the Law Commission “shared the Committee’s concern that expert opinion evidence was being admitted in criminal proceedings too readily, with insufficient scrutiny”  and believed that the “reliability requirement in the common law admissibility test was insufficiently robust”, reflecting “a generally laissez-faire approach to the admissibility of expert evidence in England and Wales”. The concerns voiced by the Committee and the Law Commission are also shared both by the courts themselves, the Court of Appeal having referred to the “unsatisfactory state of the law” in this area.12. Even critics of the Law Commission’s proposals have broadly favoured them, regarding them as being “generally in the right direction” and considering that they “may prove to be a significant improvement on the unsatisfactory current practice”.. It has been suggested that, “in order for the reforms to achieve the desired ends, there needs to be a change in culture and levels of technical sophistication among practising lawyers and judges”  and that the Law Commission did not engage sufficiently with the experience in North America of applying reliability standards in practice which suggests “that sanguine views about judicial abilities and positive effects from… a reliability-based admissibility standard, even if supplemented with training-are probably misconceived” . Thus, more will be needed to support procedural reforms by more comprehensive training, extensive standardisation and research.13. The complexity of this task can be appreciated by considering the nature of expert evidence in criminal trials. Traditional forensic science may differ from the norms of conventional science because of the uncontrolled conditions in which vital work may need to be undertaken and possibly a limited scope for replication (the latter may even apply to complex DNA analysis). Important disciplines such as fingerprint comparison, footwear comparison, forensic facial comparison and handwriting comparison are best regarded as primarily experience based opinion rather than scientific but it is important that such areas of expert evidence fall within the Regulator's areas of operation. In its Report the Law Commission accepted that "forensic scientific evidence...usually involves a scientific underpinning and an experience-based interpretive element". Classifying such areas as scientific may give the jury a misleading view of their reliability.14. There will be circumstances when the courts might need assistance in their assessment of claims to expertise that are clearly not scientific or based on the work of an established profession (e.g. lip-reading). Bearing in mind the Regulator’s important contributions both to the Law Commission consultation in preparation for its report on expert evidence and to the Scottish Fingerprint Inquiry, where else would the courts turn?15. The Regulator has already recognised this requirement. It could materialise as a result of rapid technological development, especially claims made for new identification technologies. If so, there is a danger of policies and major public expenditure commitments agreed between government, its police and security agencies, and the security or surveillance industries, outstripping both the creation of transparent and accountable governance for this technology, and judicial decisions about admissibility and reliability of evidence obtained from it. There might be a repeat of the problems encountered with the introduction of DNA evidence.16. This further illustrates the limitations of any strategy based on standardisation and accreditation alone. The potential normative, societal and legal consequences of any major technological developments affecting criminal investigations, surveillance and trials need to be fully considered. The Nuffield Council on Bioethics played a signal role in the reform of the law governing the use and retention of DNA and fingerprints. The Council’s foray into forensic bioinformation may not be repeated. This consideration and the scale of what is required suggest that there may be merit in the creation of a similar independent body for criminal justice. If, like the Nuffield Council, it were to be part-financed by RCUK, it could achieve much more. As a research commissioning role body, such a council might finally address the problem of inadequate research in forensic science, medico-legal practice and surveillance technology,  to assist forensic experts, the courts, legislators and policy makers.Declaration of interest:  None with the exception of Professor Wilson, for which see Ev w151 of the Committee’s Seventh Report of Session 2010-12.January2013 TJ Wilson and AMC Gallop, ‘Criminal Justice, Science and the marketplace: The Closure of the Forensic Science Service in Perspective’ (2013) The Journal of Criminal Law 57[forthcoming]. This is specifically enforced by the code of standards and conduct among forensic pathologists accredited by the Home Office and forensic science providers accredited by the Regulator, but not among other expert witnesses, save for rare exceptions among medical practitioners. Within England and Wales the availability of the latter forensic experts has recently been reduced by half leaving a single practitioner with no scope for peer review or an opportunity for defence lawyers to commission a second opinion from an expert of equal standing. National Academy of Sciences, Strengthening Forensic Science in the United States: A Path Forward (National Academies Press: Washington DC, 2009) 130. Statement on the Law Commission’s website at &lt;http://lawcommission.justice.gov.uk/areas/expert-evidence-in-criminal-trials.htm&gt; accessed, 9 January 2012. Forensic Science on Trial Report of the House of Commons Science and Technology Committee (2004-05) HC 96-I, 173. Above n.1, 9.1.  The Admissibility of Expert Evidence in Criminal Proceedings in England and Wales.  A New Approach to the Determination of Evidentiary Reliability.  A Consultation Paper.  Consultation Paper No 190.  Expert Evidence in criminal Proceedings, Law Com No 325, 1.2.  Ibid. Ibid, 2.16.  R v Henderson [2010] 2 Cr App R 24, 206.  Edmond, above n.2 at 62. Edmond and Roberts, above n.11 at 846.  Edmond, above n.2 at 40.  See, also, Edmond G, “Advice for the courts? Sufficiently reliable assistance with forensic science and medicine (Part 2)” (2012) 16 E &amp; P 263-297, 289. 28.  Edmond, above n.10 at 42. For example, in R v T, the Court of Appeal indicated that "It is essential, if the expert examiner of footwear expresses a view which goes beyond saying that the footwear could or could not have made the mark that the report makes clear that this is a view which is subjective and based on his experience. For that reason we do not consider that the word “scientific” should be used, as, if that phrase is put before the jury, it is likely to give an impression to the jury of a degree of precision and objectivity that is not present given the current state of this area of expertise". ‘Standards are not intended to stifle innovation..... [T]he courts will always be free to consider evidence derived from methods that, for instance, have been developed for the particular case in question and there simply hasn’t been time to include the technique in their scope of accreditation.’(Forensic Science Regulator, Codes of Practice and Conduct (The Forensic Science Regulator: Birmingham, 2011) 2.). R. Hastings, ‘From Grainy CCTV to a Positive ID’, The Independent, (London, 2 January 2013) 20-21. M. Lynch et al. Truth Machine: The Contentious History of DNA Fingerprinting (University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 2008). See the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012. Chiefly practitioner directed research, undertaken either by practitioners or concerned with issues related to but out with the primary activity of their practice. In the latter case practitioners need to decide priorities, commission studies, ensure focus and monitor progress. There is also a need for socio-legal and economic research into the use and governance of forensic science, medico-legal practice and surveillance technology.