

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[Teeside UniversityTeeside University (FSS044)]]]1. Does the Government have an effective strategy for forensic science in the UK and is it sufficient to support forensic science R&amp;D and criminal justice?1.1 It doesn’t seem that there is one so the short answer is no.1.2 There does not appear to be single accepted and coordinated nationwide strategy for forensic science practice. Individual police forces, collaborating police forces and the commercial companies may well have their own strategies which will almost certainly be different from each other.  For example some police forces are creating their own forensic laboratories and are doing this with the minimal of support and guidance.  A ‘free’ meeting with UKAS may support accreditation but it doesn’t act as a substitute for the force or company strategy to fit UK forensic science practice. The situation is more complicated with the commercial providers, many of whom have extensive experience with accreditation but have the additional driver of profit.1.3 Unfortunately what needs to be acknowledged is that the UK reputation in forensic science, built up over many decades is now under threat and needs considerable investment, innovation and integration within the investigative process to benefit the justice system to provide it with assurance and confidence.1.4 Glimmers of hope have emerged since the closure of the FSS. 1.4.1 In the area of education there has been a Quality Assurance Agency (QAA) benchmark statement in forensic science. This recognises forensic science as a subject in its own right, has science at its core and incorporates the unique nature of forensic science including the interpretation, evaluation and presentation of evidence. Any University now wishing to teach forensic science must meet this QAA benchmark.1.4.2 Following the Home Office Review into research and development in forensic science a Special Interest Group (SIG) under the Technology Strategy Board has been formed. Further following recommendation 4 of the review the Forensic Science Society has successfully run a one day taster day in R&amp;D and another three day event being planned for November 2013. 1.4.3 Even with these developments, and it is still early days since the FSS closure and the R&amp;D review, it still doesn’t seem that we have sufficient effective support for in-depth, long term research in the broad range of forensic subjects. The government needs to be willing to support research, including, at universities who teach forensic science but don’t necessarily have such a history of research. These universities generally have the practitioners who can fully contextualise the research and can be supported by research active staff in other areas. This also needs to be considered in terms of validation of new techniques as private companies may not be willing to publish their research due to the IPR as much as academic institutions who are keen to carry out research and its dissemination. With more research there will be a greater requirement for validation. This validation is not only within the investigative process but additional areas which support the investigative process such as packaging materials and the provision of additional materials for use within the process.1.5 These developments together with the drive within the UK for accreditation to quality standards in the form of the ISO standards 17020 and 17025 are improvements. However, the most important aspect of consistently providing best evidence for the court is also under threat.1.6 The view that accreditation is the answer is strikingly untrue, it is true that accreditation is part of the answer but only to a minimum standard and doesn’t raise standards to reach the goal of providing consistent best evidence to the courts. 1.7 We need to be assured that the ISO standards are having a positive impact by ensuring that they are providing uniformity not only within forces and companies but that there is a true synergy between the IOS’s, the Forensic Science Regulator Codes of Practice and the National Occupational standards.1.8 With the requirement for R&amp;D to fuel improved forensic practice it is not only blue sky research for technology and analytical procedures that is required but also the R&amp;D into core processes to deliver best evidence for the most effective and efficient procedures for all techniques, from packaging to laboratory procedures and the interpretation and evaluation of the evidence to the justice system.1.9 The role of the professional body, The Forensic Science Society, including the area of educational standards and R&amp;D is excellent but there is a limit to how far the professional body funds can stretch. &#xa0;2. Did the FSS transition and closure run smoothly and within budget?2.1 We don’t have sufficient information to comment on this question.&#xa0;3. What impacts have the FSS’s closure had on (i) the criminal justice system and (ii) forensic science R&amp;D and training? In particular, have the appropriate quality standards and accreditation been rigorously maintained? (please provide evidence/examples)3.1 Impact on the Criminal Justice System – this is best answered by the judiciary in terms of quality and quantity of cases being presented to the CPS and courts. However we have seen a recent DNA issue within one of the commercial providers which impacted the justice system. Therefore the bigger question which needs to be answered is whether the justice system and public are confident and assured that the development of the industry is supporting public safety while it becomes more fragmented.  3.1.1 Further, as more work moves into police forces can we be confident that complaints and issues relating to the provision of scientific evidence be thoroughly and openly managed and resolved. In the light of the Hillsborough incident and the Mitchell incident can the public be confident that their forensic provision will remain independent with the highest integrity? Under the ISO standard all complaints are expected to be logged and covered for independence, impartiality and integrity. 3.2 The R&amp;D – The FSS intimated that they did a lot of research but in the later years before it closed it was questionable if they were still leading the UK in R&amp;D. Although there have been a number of significant changes for the good with the R&amp;D review (mentioned above) there is still no national coordinated lead or strategy for R&amp;D. 3.3 The FSS didn't really govern quality in forensic research, but the perception now is that research has been left to fend for itself with limited governmental input. 3.4 There must be a coordinated approach on R&amp;D in the UK.  There is lots being done such as the Forensic Science Society Forum for Universities and Industry, conferences (one day in Nov. 2013 and three days in Nov 2013) but there are still untapped R&amp;D within good quality BSc and MSc level projects. These selected projects could be made available to the community in the same way as PhD’s are.3.5 Part of the solution must be to enable more collaborative partnerships.  The days when there could be one physical central research establishment may have passed but the strategic leadership and central coordination is still needed. Universities are keen to collaborate with practitioners in police forces and with companies but this still needs national and regional coordination. It is without doubt a good thing for police forces and companies to work with Universities such as educational awards which Teesside University is involved with but also on various other activities including research projects. It is quite possible to keep things confidential and the research findings can feed into the bigger picture and guide future good practice. Universities can and would be willing to work confidentially with police forces and companies and only publish their data with permission especially when the findings could have much wider relevance and impact.3.6 Training – the overall training and continual professional development including continual professional competency is a big area and there have been a number of new SME’s starting to come to market since the closure of the FSS. We would suggest that consistent accreditation and individual competency coupled with the strive for optimisation of practices and procedures within R&amp;D are the biggest areas to provide the justice system with assurance and confidence. &#xa0;4. What should be role of the Forensic Science Regulator?4.1 The requirement for and role of the Forensic Science Regulator was clear in 2007/8. However, there are a number of key areas needing addressed. Firstly the statutory position of the Regulator and associated powers to oversee forensic science practice. Secondly concerning the area of the practitioner being ‘fit to practice’, possibly linking with the professional body. Anyone providing evidence to court needs to be fit to practice. Thirdly it needs to be recognised that the Regulator is not the person to throw all the forensic science practice issues at such as funding, CCTV and research. 4.2 There is a need to ring fence the role within the quality arena – set, maintain and monitor and then identify the other areas with overlap but outside the remit of the Regulator. For example does research fit comfortably with the Regulator or can the Regulator be the conduit to coordinating research with practice.4.3 We should not believe that accreditation to the ISO standards such as 17025 and 17020 will ensure consistency of quality standards or enable continual improvement to provide best evidence to the courts.4.4 The Police are in a difficult situation with their budgets and the greater provision on in-house forensic practice. They also need to contribute to the improvement in quality standards and carry out research.  As a minimum they need to set up partnerships with commercial companies and Universities to enable worthwhile R&amp;D.5. What is the size of the forensics market and how stable is it?5.1 This is a difficult question because one needs to define the ‘forensics market’.  For example when the Home Office were considering the size of the market during the transition of the FSS to a GovCo the market was estimated at an amount considerably more than that now being suggested – less than £100m. It is important to be able estimate the size of the total market and not just the commercial company slice. 5.2 Nevertheless the market size seems to be judged by the amount the commercial sector is involved with – currently about £80m and therefore falling.  The overall size including all the police forces, commercial providers, Universities / SME etc. is probably fairly stable.  The full question can’t be answered until the police forces understand what their forensic provision costs using the same model as the commercial providers and include not only the building and over heads but HR, finance etc. 5.3 Overall our feeling may well be that the market is growing due to its fragmentation.  The size of the market should be confused with the quality of the service to the justice system.6. &#xa0;How are forensic science services procured by police forces and could procurement processes be improved?6.1 We have insufficient intimate knowledge of the procurement process. However, anecdotal evidence would suggest that there is a large bureaucratic beast dealing with this (which should be part of the calculation on the size of the market and drain on police budgets).  Small companies seem to spend an enormous amount of time filling out forms to apply within the procurement process.6.2 One could argue that there is no need for such a process and let the customers purchase, under guidelines, the service they require. The key difficulty here is the phrase ‘level the playing field’ and the transparency of procurement process.7. Has the closure of the FSS resulted in a loss of intellectual wealth through its scientists leaving the forensic science profession, or the UK? (please provide evidence/examples).7.1 Yes, from one x FSS employee – “only half of the people I worked with now have jobs within the industry - they are deemed too expensive possibly when graduates can be used for a low cost. Examples of where they have ended up: dentists assistant, moved to Canada, working for environment agency, unemployed (returning to education) etc.”8. Are current arrangements for the FSS’s archives satisfactory? How could arrangements for the retention of case files and forensic materials in the UK be improved?We consider that the question is much bigger than only the FSS archive.  It should relate to the case files and associated materials for all police forces, commercial providers and other providers, including the process to deal with the retention and storage of materials if a police force or company no longer undertakes forensic science practice. The time scales are clear for retention but the actual physical retention across the UK is key to support the justice system.&#xa0;January 2013 The secret to success here will be the ability to identify companies whose products can be adapted to the investigative process.