&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by First Forensic Limited (FSS048)]]]First Forensic Limited has been a private provider of forensic science to police, lawyer’s corporate and individual clients for over ten years. First Forensic Limited is a registered provider on the National Forensic Framework Agreement for footwear and fire investigation services. It is managed and operated by two highly experienced forensic practitioners with backgrounds in police, private and government (FSS) forensic laboratories.There appears to be no effective strategy for the provision of forensic science to the CJS and no coherent or co-ordinated use of practitioners, FSP and universities to provide a focused approach to R &amp; D. Many universities provide forensic science courses within which research is carried out. Very rarely, however, is this research focussed on the requirements of the CJS or forensic providers.Given the timescales involved and the quantity of work involved the transition appeared to run as smoothly as expected. Cannot comment on the budget considerations.The criminal justice system appeared fairly oblivious to the existence of providers other than the FSS and in our experience there has been no impact, real or perceived, on the system as a whole.There is no question, in our view, that overall quality of the FSPs is as high if not higher than pre FSS. Despite some well publicised incidents, FSPs maintain rigorous quality standards to ISO 17025 or equivalent. There were many incidents of quality failings within the FSS which simply did not make the news.There is, however, a real potential threat to the maintenance of quality standards due to the amount of police “in-sourcing” of forensic examinations. Although FSPs are required by their clients (police) to obtain ISO accreditation; they place no such burden on themselves to provide this service. Some forces have voluntarily taken the accreditation route but others have shied away. In the past few years the FSS carried out very little research other than associated with DNA and its contribution to broader forensic research has been over estimated. However, many FSPs, universities and individuals have contributed to research.Training has generally, been provided “in-house” and this is still generally the case. There has, however, been an increase in the number of suppliers of forensic training and this could be considered a “success” of the closure of the FSS.The forensic regulator should play an important role in ensuring consistency of forensic science delivery and maintenance of quality standards. In our view, the demise of CRFP, for all its faults, is regrettable. The application of ISO 17025/17020 standards are fairly generic and not specific to forensic science. Ultimately, an individual stands up in court to give evidence. ISO standards do not The size of the market is impossible to establish as the definition of “forensics” is very loose and encompasses traditional FSPs, defence providers, police, CSI and others.The market place cannot be considered stable. The purpose of the National Forensic Framework Agreement was to encourage a range of service providers. It has not done so. The process of tendering is complex and discourages SME’s. Several companies have withdrawn from the framework. In addition, some of the major providers have adopted a policy of offering unsustainably cheap prices to obtain the work and eliminate alternative providers. This, ultimately, will mean the police will have fewer providers to choose from and ultimately higher uncontested prices.Increasingly, the use of police “in-sourcing” of forensic science services has further destabilised the market. Although, in our view, there is a place for screening and selection of forensic exhibits at the source (police force) it needs to be done carefully. Many of the “business cases” we have seen for in sourcing have been spurious if not creative.Virtually all police work is via mini competitions through the National Framework Agreement. However, many forces and ACPO regions have deviated from the norm and created “mega-lots” or combinations which have excluded SME’s. The process of tendering is also over-complex and favours the larger organisations who are able to commit full time staff to tender management.There appears to be no mechanism for new companies to obtain positions on the framework or for existing companies to extend their expertise.During the mini competitions many of the questions are repetitions of previous tenders. It would improve if core functions, such as security, BCDR, accreditations were done once for the period of the framework and the mini tenders were concentrated on price and service delivery.To a limited extent, yes. Many of the experienced forensic scientists were on the point of retirement and took the opportunity to retire early. Many have also established private consultancies although only time will tell if the market place will support these. None of these consultancies appear to have achieved any form of accreditation and rely on their previous employment as credentials. It is to be hoped this will change.Generally, no. In carrying out defence examinations there is often a problem with locating files and retained materials. In addition, some FSPs have insisted on payment for defence examinations, often at well above market rates. This has resulted in additional costs for Legal Services Commission.January 2013