&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Gillespie Robertson (CLC003)]]]1.Current state of public understanding (and recent changes in that state) :  educated adults used to understand the words “climate change” as meaning observable and measurable movements in the ever-changing  global and regional climate over all time-scales in the history of planet earth and of human civilisation,  and also as experienced by any observant individual throughout  his or her  lifetime . Over the last one or two decades,  educated people have been surprised and disappointed to see and  hear these words used almost exclusively, both by many ill-informed politicians and  by alarmist doomsayers,  as if they meant “catastrophic anthropogenic global warming (CAGW.) ” My own understanding has improved immeasurably from nearly 5 years of careful and detailed reading on all sides mostly of the scientific, but also of the political,  arguments. Above all I have come to understand how the modesty of early climate scientist-historians such as Hubert Lamb has given way to the arrogance of those who pretend that mankind’s knowledge of the different factors which drive the earth’s climate is anything other than minimal, primitive, and thus incidentally grossly inadequate in terms of supporting any related Governmental policy initiatives other than a need to carry out fundamental research on ALL climate drivers.2.Trusted voices :  those very few who concentrate on measurable and observed climate data  and who use moderate and temperate language,  rather than those who rely on unproven and falsifiable hypotheses,  publicise computer-modelled scenarios,  issue public doomsday predictions,  and/or  make highly personal attacks on those who disagree with them.3.Role of Government :  it was the Nazi propagandist Dr. Goebbels,  of eternal infamy,  who said “It is the absolute right of the State to supervise the formation of public opinion.”   All decent people should and most do recoil in horror from the direction in which this sort of thinking leads.  The lamentable track record to date of U.K. Government Departments , “scientific advisers” and “publicly funded scientists”  in largely supporting a highly dubious  and often scientifically illiterate alarmist “climate change” message to the public underscores the view that  Governments and their advisers should lean over backwards to avoid ALL  propaganda in respect of “climate science.”4.Improving public understanding :  your questionnaire is fundamentally  flawed. It starts from a number of wrong premises  --   you appear to proceed from the assumption that CAGW (see above) is true, deadly and happening now. This leads to the second assumption  : that rising scepticism must be because people are ignorant or ill-informed. The third  -- and typically totalitarian  --  assumption then follows, namely that what is needed is re-education. Barriers to understanding : the main one is a lack of knowledge. The answer is personal effort to obtain, study and interpret  data, not to read Government propaganda. The media’s role : this is already, and is more likely  than  not to continue to be,  largely negative in terms of working against the public interest which Government is supposed to serve   : bad news sells, and alarmist climate propaganda is “bad news.” The worst possible scenario is of a Government-controlled media. To quote the appalling Dr. Goebbels again, “Think of the Press as a great keyboard on which the Government can play.” 5.Public understanding and policy formation:  one can only hope that the public will increasingly recognise the folly of its Government behaving like King Canute of legend.  The arrogance and folly of humans pretending to have a “climate change policy” at all,  let alone an effective one, is beyond belief ;  and if one looks at the entire global picture,  the arrogance and folly of the U.K. Government in particular is unparalleled.6.Public attitudes and energy policy :  there is much evidence that most politicians are still unaware of the extent to which the educated public is waking up to the folly of recent and current U.K energy policy, based as it is on promoting and subsidising the least efficient, least reliable and highest cost forms of electricity generation on the basis of “climate science” and in the name of “saving the planet from dangerous climate change.”    One must fervently hope that  our political class will very soon wake up to the scientific realities and to the extremely damaging economic and social consequences of recent energy policies and initiatives.7.Government expertise in social and behavioural sciences : your question is confused,  but has unpleasant Orwellian undertones of totalitarian thinking.8.Can lessons be learned from other countries ?  Global evidence points to increasing public disaffection with and (with the exception of small but very well-funded pressure groups) disengagement from Governmental focus on “climate change policy”  as a major societal concern. It seems probable that Governments which continue with  such a focus will eventually lose public support for their entire political platforms, simply  because of the severe economic and even environmental damage which some of those policies are increasingly wreaking.  April 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;