

[[[Written evidence submitted by the National Oceanography Centre (ESA010)]]]

[[[Declaration of interests]]]The National Oceanography Centre (NOC) is a research centre wholly owned by the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC). NOC undertakes integrated ocean research and technology development from the coast to the deep ocean. The Satellite Oceanography group at NOC (NOC-SO) delivers fundamental global earth observation ocean research, and consultancy and training in ocean remote sensing techniques to monitor the ocean, shelf seas and coastal regions. NOC-SO is actively engaged with the European Space Agency, which is a major funder of the NOC-SO activities in the form of contracts. NOC-SO has developed close relationships with key stakeholders in the space sector, particularly in the UK with companies such as SSTL and Astrium. NOC’s position within academic research and its long-term strategic outlook allows it to define and develop new satellite missions, sensors and Earth Observation products that address the needs of operational users, enhance the international competitive advantage of the UK space industry and are of benefit to science.&#xa0;1.1 ESA is a major funder of research and development (R&amp;D) in Earth Observation, mainly through contracts awarded after open competitive tendering across its member states. ESA’s tendered work is clearly tied to the overall scientific objectives outlined in ESA’s well publicized and regularly updated strategy, which accounts for latest technical advances and awareness of the evolving needs of its users. Contracts are closely supervised by highly qualified technical officers from ESA and characterised by a clear set of deliverables to be produced within a usually tight schedule. 1.2 Despite tough demands and relatively small budgets (typically &lt; 500KEuros), ESA R&amp;D contracts are prestigious and sought-after, as they produce well-focused cutting edge research on technically challenging topics and promote the development of new capability, which itself often leads to further funding opportunities. 1.3 ESA is also one of very few funding bodies that will support all partners, academic and industrial alike, at 100% funding level. This promotes real working partnerships and the development of long-term relationships between academia and industry. It also provides the means to collaborate with partners in other European countries by way of small project teams, without the heavy administrative burden imposed by current EU funding schemes (e.g. FP7).2.1 NOC is not in a position to comment on the most effective governance between ESA, EU and UK. 2.2 However, the “rapprochement” of ESA towards the EU that is proposed by the European Commission does not seem desirable, since it will undoubtedly disrupt ESA’s ability to deliver as a “world-class organization that deserves credit for European successes in the space field over the last decades”, a fact that is recognised by the Commission itself. 2.3 While investments in ESA have led to major successes and the development of a strong, internationally competitive European space sector, the scientific and economic returns on the large investments made in EU science programs are arguably less clear. ESA's funding of space R&amp;D shows detailed understanding of the scientific drivers and industrial capability in Europe, leading to well-focussed projects. In contrast, the EU funds mainly large projects, selected after grading by non-specialist anonymous peer-reviewers, where significant resources are diverted away from research to deal with the EU’s bureaucratic demands and unwieldy management tools. 2.4 In addition, whereas there are clear established channels for the UK to make its voice heard within ESA, the ways to influence the EU are more opaque and drawn-out and may result in a loss of influence in decisions relevant to the interests of the UK space sector.&#xa0;3.1 NOC is not in a position to comment on the impact of changes to the Multi-Annual Financial Framework on ESA and support from Horizon 2020.3.2 Projects funded so far under the Commission's FP7 Space calls do not generally support new R&amp;D in the space sector but tend to exploit opportunities arising from previous investments by ESA. EU funded space projects are mainly concerned with facilitating access to established Earth Observation (EO) data products, or with the exploitation of existing EO products for societal and economic benefits. 3.3 There is no or little EU investment in designing/building new space instrumentation, developing new algorithms and products, or in validation and quality control of EO products. The latter are areas of research that score badly in competitive science assessment systems (including those in the UK) and are thus predominantly funded by ESA. Yet, these activities are essential to bridge the gap between two end points - development of satellite missions and sensors on the one hand, and the downstream exploitation of established EO products for environmental science, operational monitoring and commercial services.&#xa0;4.1 NOC welcomed the increased UK contribution to the ESA budget at the last ministerial meeting in 2012. This visible commitment by the UK to space sent a strong message across Europe and immediately opened up new opportunities for the UK to benefit from its investments in ESA. 4.2 NOC also welcomed the establishment of the UK Space Agency (UKSA) as the means of providing national focus and coordination of space activities. There is, however, much room for improvement, in particular regarding UKSA’s detachment and inaccessibility from the UK space community. While we recognize that UKSA is currently undergoing management changes, we can only hope that these changes will address the shortcomings of its operations so far. The main issues with UKSA are as follows: 4.2.1 Insufficient scientific or technical awareness by UKSA representatives attending important official meetings (e.g. ESA PBEO and GMES ). This contrasts with other European countries whose representatives have enough scientific understanding to grasp the nature and relevance of issues being discussed. 4.2.2 Poor communication with the UK space community of UK strategic interests and priorities. For example, little is known about the motivation for the UK’s increased contribution to ESA, or about which ESA programs are seen as UK high or low priorities.4.2.3 No transparency about the interactions between UKSA and other UK agencies with interests in space and Earth Observation, e.g. NERC, National Centre for Earth Observation, Centre for Earth Observation Instrumentation, DEFRA, Met Office, etc. These interactions are the main routes to ensure integration of space activities within the UK. Yet there are no visible signs of their effectiveness, or even of their existence. An important example relates to the UK position of the funding of Jason-CS to ensure continuity of high-precision time series of sea level measurements from satellite altimeters.4.2.4 It is important that the respective responsibilities of UKSA and NERC to support research that bridges the gap between technology development, science advance and exploitation are clarified. The UK needs to avoid the situation where academics who engage with the private sector to develop and validate new missions, sensors and products are seen by NERC as falling under the remit of UKSA, and by UKSA as falling under the remit of NERC. The ambiguity about who funds such important inter-disciplinary research is likely to originate from tight budgetary conditions both in NERC and UKSA.4.2.5 With the exception of the small but very successful Centre for Earth Observation Instrumentation, there has been little opportunity in the UK in recent years for open competitive tendering for research relating specifically to space and Earth Observation. The Harwell ISIC and Space Catapult initiatives are likely to present such opportunities in future but it remains unclear (after more than 2 years since they were set up) how academic and industrial players can best engage with these, and what form these opportunities will take.&#xa0;5.1 The UK geo-return within ESA is now close to 1, meaning that we receive most of our investments into ESA back in the form of contracts. This is a substantial improvement from the situation just a few years ago. 5.2 With limited UK funding for Earth Observation in recent years, ESA has provided a lifeline for many Earth Observation scientists in the UK and contributed to the development of long-term partnerships between UK academia and industry. Participation in ESA programs contributed to new scientific and industrial capability in the UK space sector, which now gives the UK a competitive edge in relation to new opportunities within ESA (e.g. Earth Explorer 9) and elsewhere (e.g. SSTL’s involvement in the NASA CYGNSS and NSPO/NOAA FORMOSAT-7/COSMIC-2 missions). &#xa0;6.1 NOC is not in a position to comment on the resilience of the UK space-based infrastructure, or the threat to space debris or solar activity.&#xa0;April 2013  www.noc.ac.uk www.nerc.ac.uk PBEO = ESA Earth Observation Programme Board  GMES = Global Monitoring for Environment and Security ISIC = International Space Innovation Centre SSTL = Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd NSPO = National Space Organisation of Taiwan NOAA – National Oceanic &amp; Atmospheric Administration USA