&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[Dr Neil T. Gavin]]]

[[[, ]]]

[[[The University of Liverpool]]]

[[[ (CLC026)]]]&#xa0;1.              

[[[Executive summary]]]&#xa0;1.1              Current research gives us limited understanding of how the structure and content of media coverage impinges on public understanding of climate change. Work done on television coverage – the public’s most trusted and most used source of information – has been undertaken by this submission’s author. It illuminates a set of worrying patterns that are under-explored by principal funders of research.&#xa0;1.2              Unique research undertaken by the author suggests televisual coverage of climate change has diminished. But such coverage as there is has a measurable influence on the emphasis that citizens place on the topic as a significant issue facing Britain. This ‘salience’ is an important precursor to further public engagement, but needs to be viewed in the light of climate sceptic coverage (a topic also under-explored in research).&#xa0;1.3              This submission suggests that the main research funders need encouragement to support work that integrates of research on public attitude formation (heavily funded), with long-term assessments of press and television coverage of climate change.&#xa0;1.4              Broadcasters in both the non-commercial and commercial sectors need to be challenged on the emphasis placed on documenting climate change. In addition, senior government politicians ought to be challenged on the extent to which they are prepared to invest political capital in raising the profile of climate change. Finally, press editors should be challenged on their rationale for continued emphasis on climate scepticism.&#xa0;&#xa0;2.              

[[[Introduction]]]&#xa0;2.1              This evidence is based on the author’s extensive contribution to political communication research. This straddles climate-related public relations, the coverage of climate change in all significant media (press, television and the internet),1 and the media’s impact on public attitudes.2 The author of this is also currently Convenor of the Media, Communication and Cultural Studies Association’s ‘Climate Change, Environment and Sustainability network, an umbrella organisation for scholars researching environmental issues.&#xa0;2.2              The evidence is also given against a background of ongoing exploratory research on climate change coverage’s impact on public attitudes, and the incidence of climate sceptic coverage in the British press.3&#xa0;3.              

[[[Factual Information]]]&#xa0;              Background&#xa0;3.1              The press is currently taking a diminishing interest in climate (see Figure 3.1). This is worryingly consistent with the rise, plateau and decline pattern outlined in ‘issue attention cycle’ thesis, with we may well be at a phase characterised by declining interest and a ‘post-problem’ mentality.4 Here, spikes around the Copenhagen conference and recently, are not necessarily reassuring, as they may represent the ‘spasmodic recurrence’ of attention allowed for in this perspective. In addition, this overarching pattern cannot be looked at in isolation from the much, much larger quantity of coverage that bears on non-climate, ‘bread-and-butter’ issues, like crime, health and economics.1&#xa0;              Figure 3.1 UK Press Stories Containing ‘Climate’                                          Source: http://sciencepolicy.colorado.edu/media_coverage/uk/index.html&#xa0;              3.2              The underlying structure of this coverage has some features that are well established. First, the broadsheet (and notably the Guardian and Independent) make a very notable contribution. Second, broadsheet coverage has a sophisticated take on climate change, with sceptical messages, according to some assessments, much less apparent than they were.5 Third, the high circulation mid-market and tabloid press takes a lesser interest, but the tabloid in particular are not trusted, nor are they cited by citizens as their principal information source. Nevertheless, the wider literature on ‘media effects’ suggests that broadsheets and the mid-market ‘black top’ titles have the potential to influence public appreciation of climate change.2 Other work on public perceptions of the climate commentary suggests the citizens cite the media as a source of climate information, talk to family and friends about such coverage, but nevertheless continue to dispute global warming’s anthropogenic basis, and are still confused about the science.6&#xa0;3.3              What is much less well-understood, is how television which is trusted used as a reliable information, refracts climate issues. The author’s research suggest that even at significant ‘moments’ for climate change (such as Copenhagen, 2009), television news coverage is quite modest, a historical pattern noted by others.7 It also suggested that climate sceptic messages are more prominent than is commonly acknowledged, or healthy. However, there is very little research that deals directly with the impact of such coverage.6 &#xa0;3.4              Some current research has sought to update what the public think about climate change, and how this relates to media representations, sponsored by UKERC and by a combination of NERC, DECC and Defra.8 However, solid as this work is, it suffers in some important respects. The focus is primarily on attitudes and attitude development. But it is not closely articulated to an assessment of the long-term patterning of coverage across all media (especially, though not exclusively, with regard to TV coverage, or the prevalence of climate sceptic messages across the media). Finally, with a reliance on focus group techniques it does not explore the full range of ways in which ‘media impact’ is generally conceived and evidenced.&#xa0;              Recent research &#xa0;3.5              What little work that has been done on TV documentary coverage of climate change, has been conducted by this submission’s author.1 This genre is important. It is a source citizens trust, and documentaries can give sustained attention to the issue lacking in news bulletins. An ongoing and exhaustive survey of climate documentary  programming shows the same general structure as press coverage – a rise, plateau, then decline (see Figure 3.2 below, and Appendix). It is noteworthy that, like press coverage, the greatest emphasis came at a time when the Prime Minister, Chancellor and DECC Minister all strove persistently to make climate change a high profile issue at the heart of government (with Opposition leaders compelled to position themselves accordingly). The current situation has seen both a drop in press and television coverage, at a time when climate change is given a much lower profile by significant figures in the government.&#xa0;              Figure 3.2 Year-on-year documentary coverage of climate change&#xa0;              &#xa0;3.6              The structure of documentary coverage is concerning for a number of reasons. First, the vast bulk of these documentaries are on BBC, not the commercial channels. This is understandable, if commercial broadcasters consider this form of programming unlikely to draw large audience, and hence generate limited advertising revenue. But this perhaps consigns their duty to keep the public informed about one of the most commanding issues of our generation, to a second-order priority. Second, of the last three documentaries, only one was on BBC1. Before this, there was only one in late 2009 and another in mid-2010. The rest predate March 2007.This too is significant. BBC1 is the place where viewers are most likely to encounter documentaries. They watch around 9.8 hours per year on BBC1,8 so a drop off here is potentially significant for audience exposure to the issue. ITV1 is next in line, with the public watching 3.8 hours per year on this channel – a considerable way behind. But although the last two documentaries were on ITV1, there were no others in our inventory. Again, audience exposure to climate change (or, rather, its absence) is an issue here. Finally, the vast bulk of documentaries were on niche channels characterised by low audiences (BBC2, BBC3, BBC4, and to a much lesser extent, on their commercial counterparts).&#xa0;3.7              This picture is significant in itself, but more so in view of recent exploratory research undertaken by this submission’s author, on the media’s so-called ‘agenda-setting’ role – where they possess the power to direct citizen attention to particular issues, via the quantity of coverage. Their output influences the extent to which citizens consider an issue a significant one facing the country (its ‘salience’). The analysis explored the period between 2000 and late 2007, before ‘the economy’ began to dominate political, media and public agendas. Unlike Figure 3.1, it only tracked press stories where climate figured in headlines. In addition, it differentiated between stories from the broadsheets, the mid-market ‘black tops’ (Mail/Express), and the ‘red top’ tabloids, and entered them separately in the model. A number of political events (such as 9/11 and Gulf War 2) also figured in the assessment, to determine if they had any role in distracting citizens from environmental issues. Finally, and uniquely, our analysis factored in the Figure 3.2’s documentaries. But, in addition, a separate variable was entered for the ‘Great Global Warming Swindle’ documentary, because – unlike all others – its highly controversial message was unequivocally at odds with the scientific consensus.&#xa0;3.8              The results suggest that only broadsheet coverage had an impact on ‘salience’. There was no such impact for either the ‘black tops’ or ‘red tops’, nor did the political event variables achieve statistical significance. But importantly there was an interaction effect between broadsheet coverage and documentary coverage: in effect, the two mediums conjoin to produce a greater influence on salience, than the broadsheet press would on its own. Additionally, the ‘Great Global Warming Swindle’ had an independent, measurable and statistically significant impact in lowering salience. This particular finding is unsurprising in some respects. ‘Swindle’s highly controversial nature helped generate an audience of nearly two million, in all likelihood far beyond that of many (if not all) the other documentaries. In addition, it generated supportive commentary in the Telegraph and the black top press.1 But, if unsurprising, the finding is still worrying, given its potent counter-consensus message. The results underscore the problematic nature of Channel 4’s defence of its broadcast, on the grounds that it balanced a portfolio of environmental output which also contained material consistent with the scientific consensus.9 &#xa0;3.9              Given the findings, it is no surprise that with climate change now diminished in press coverage (Figure 3.1), and documentary coverage dwindling (Figure 4.1), the salience of the environment is at a record and worrying low, and on a sharp downward track. 10 But another feature of ongoing research on the British press is pertinent here. It has tracked climate sceptic messages in our national newspapers, and suggests unchallenged contrarian commentary is still persistent in a broadsheet press that helps drive the salience of climate (notably in the Telegraph), and in a black top press that so conspicuously supported the ‘Great Global Warming Swindle’ documentary.3&#xa0;4.0              

[[[Conclusions]]]&#xa0;4.1              From the perspective of the evidence presented here, the picture is concerning. It invites us to consider a number of interrelated issues. To what extent do we need a research agenda that takes into consideration the structure of climate change coverage in the widest possible range of media? Do we need to find a way to integrate existing research on climate attitudes and attitude development, with a fuller appreciation of these structures. And to what extent do the principal funders of such research need to be encouraged to acknowledge such issues?&#xa0;4.2              In addition, there are questions for the broadcasters and for the press. Given the remit of the former to educate and inform the public, how far are they prepared to go to document climate change in the future? Will their output reflect the urgency the scientific community express about the issue, and will this be tempered significantly by concerns about audience figures and advertising revenue? And to what extent will counter-consensus messages like that embodied in the ‘Great Global Warming Swindle’ be given a place in broadcasting output? For newspaper editors, some of the same themes emerge. Although, the press acknowledge no obligation to inform or educate the public, they should perhaps consider more fully than they do at present, the potential impact their coverage has, and the extent to which it serves the public good.&#xa0;4.3              Finally, what role do senior government politicians have in heightening the media profile of climate change? The media often take their cue on what is important from these figures. Here, the issue of political leadership comes to the forefront.&#xa0;              Declaration&#xa0;              The author of this evidence declares no conflict of interest in its presentation.&#xa0;&#xa0;April 2013Notes&#xa0;1              Gavin, N.T. (2007), ‘The Global Warming Issue in Britain and the Politics of Documentary Journalism’, a paper prepared for the Political Studies Association’s ‘Media and Politics Group’ conference, University of Staffordshire, November; Gavin, N.T. (2009) ‘The EU and its ‘Promotions Deficit’: Political Communication and the Global Warming Issue’, pp.79-89 in Charles, A. and Wilson, J. (eds) Media in the Enlarged Europe (Bristol: Intellect); Gavin, N.T. (2009) ‘The Web and Climate Change: Lessons from Britain?’, pp.129-42 in Boyce, T. and Lewis, J. (eds) Climate Change and the Media (Oxford: Peter Lang); Gavin, N.T. (2009) ‘Addressing Climate Change: A Media Perspective’, Environmental Politics 18(5) pp.765-80; Gavin, N.T. (2010) ‘Pressure Group Direct Action on Climate Change: The Role of the Media and the Web in Britain – A Case Study’, British Journal of Politics and International Relations 12(3) pp.459-75; Gavin, N.T. and Leonard-Milsom, L., with Montgomery, J. (2011) ‘Climate Change, Flooding and the Media in Britain’, Public Understanding of Science 20(3).pp.422-38; Gavin, N.T. and Marshall, T. (2011) ‘Climate Change and International Protest at Copenhagen: Reflections on British Television and the Web’, in Cottle, S. (ed.) Transnational Protests and the Media (Oxford: Peter Lang), pp.197-209; Gavin, N.T. and Marshall, T. (2011) ‘Mediated Climate Change in Britain: Scepticism on the Web and on Television Around Copenhagen’ Global Environmental Change 21(3) pp.1035-44; Chadborn, N., Springett, J., Robinson, J., Gavin, N.T. and Dewar, S. (2013) ‘‘Cycling - Exercise or Trying to Stop Pollution?’: New Opportunities for Children to Tackle Obesity and Climate Change’ Local Environment 18(3) pp.271-88.&#xa0;2              Goddard, P., Corner, J. Gavin, N.T. and Richardson, K. (1998) ‘Economic News and the Dynamics of Public Understanding: The Liverpool Project’ pp.9-37 in Gavin, N.T. The Economy, Media and Public Knowledge (Leicester: Leicester University Press); Gavin, N.T. and Sanders, D. (2003) ‘The Press and its Influence on British Political Attitudes Under New Labour’, Political Studies, 51(3) pp.573-591; Sanders, D. and Gavin, N. T. (2004) ‘Television News, Economic Perceptions and Political Preferences in Britain, 1997-2001’, Journal of Politics, 66(4), pp.1245-1266; Gavin, N.T. (2007) Press and Television in British Politics: Media, Money and Mediated Democracy (London: Palgrave/Macmillan); Gavin, N.T. (2007) ‘Global Warming and the British Press: The Emergence of an Issue and its Political Implications’, a paper prepared for the Political Studies Association’s ‘Elections, Public Opinion and Parties’ conference, University of the West of England, Bristol, September 2007.&#xa0;3              Gavin, N.T. and Sanders, D. ‘The Media, Climate Change and Agenda-Setting: The Press and Television in Britain’; Painter, J. and Gavin, N.T. ‘Climate Scepticism in the British Press’&#xa0;4              Downs, A. (1972) ‘Up and Down with Ecology: The Issue–Attention Cycle’ , The Public Interest, 28 (1) pp.38–50.&#xa0;5              Boykoff, M.T. (2007) ‘Flogging a Dead Norm? Newspaper Coverage of Anthropogenic Climate Change in the United States and United Kingdom from 2003 to 2006’, Area 39(4) pp.470-81.&#xa0;6              Butler, C. and Pigeon, N (2009) ‘Media Communications and Public Understanding of Climate Change: Reporting Scientific Consensus on Anthropogenic Warming’, pp.43-58 in Boyce, T. and Lewis, J. (eds) Climate Change and the Media (Oxford: Peter Lang).&#xa0;7              Gavin, N.T. and Marshall, T. (2011) ‘Mediated Climate Change in Britain: Scepticism on the Web and on Television Around Copenhagen’ Global Environmental Change 21(3) pp.1035-44; Hargreaves, I., Lewis, J. and Speers, T. (2003) Towards a Better Map: Science, the Public and the Media (Economic and Social Research Council).&#xa0;8              Happer, C., Philo, G. and Froggatt, A. (2012) Climate Change and Energy Security (London: UK Energy Research Centre); Shuckburgh, E., Robison, R. and Pidgeon, N. (2012) Climate Science, the Public and the News Media (London: LWEC).&#xa0;9              Ofcom (2006) The Provision of Current Affairs (London: Ofcom).&#xa0;10              Ch4 Head of Science, ‘Debate hots up over climate change dissidents’, Guardian 14/3/07:              http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2007/mar/14/guardianletters.climatechange?INTCMP=SRCH&#xa0;11              http://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/3118/EconomistIpsos-MORI-January-2013-Issues-Index.aspx &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Appendix: Climate Change Documentaries]]]&#xa0;Horizon: Global Dimming (BBC2, Jan. 2005)Seven Days That Shook the Weathermen (More 4,  Feb. 2006)Meltdown: A Global Warming Journey (BBC4,  Feb. 2006)Climate Conspiracy or Global Catastrophe? (BBC4, Feb. 2006)Art From the Arctic (BBC4, Feb. 2006)The Life and Times of El Nino (BBC4, Mar. 2006)Are We Changing Planet Earth?  (BBC1, May 2006)Global Warming: Bush’s Climate of Fear (BBC1, Jun. 2006)Can We Save Planet Earth? (BBC1, Jun. 2006)Five Disasters Waiting to Happen (BBC2, Jun. 2006)Climate Change: Britain Under Threat (BBC1, Jan. 2007)Five Ways to Save the World (BBC2, Feb. 2007)Dispatches: Greenwash (CH4, Mar. 2007)The Great Global Warming Swindle (CH4, Mar. 2007)Panorama Goes Green (BBC1, Mar. 2007)How Green is Your High Street? (BBC2, Jun. 2007)Britain’s Embarrassing Emissions (BBC3 Jul. 2009)Future of Food (i) (BBC2, Nov. 2009)This World – Can Obama Save the Planet (BBC2, Nov. 2009)Earth – Climate Wars (i), (ii) and (iii) (BBC2 Dec 2009)Hot Planet (BBC1 Dec 2009)Panorama: What’s Up with the Weather (BBC1 Jun 2010)Dispatches: The Great Green Smoke Screen (CH4, Jun 2010)Horizon: Science Under Attack (BBC2  Jan 2011)Storyville: Meet the Sceptics (BBC4 Jan 2011)Frozen Planet: On Thin Ice (BBC1 Dec 2011)Horizon: Global Weirding (BBC2 Mar 2012)Tonight: The Great British Weather (ITV1 May 2012)Tonight: Whatever Happened to the Summer (ITV1 Sept 2012)&#xa0;The Committee might care to enquire what plans and provision, if any, are being made by the BBC in particular to highlight in documentary coverage in a manner that will gain public attention.&#xa0;