&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by UNICEF UK (CLC027)]]]1. Introduction1.1 The UK National Committee for UNICEF welcomes the opportunity to submit evidence to Science and Technology Committee Inquiry into Climate Change: public understanding and its policy implications 1.2 UNICEF, the United Nations Children’s Fund, is mandated by the United Nations General Assembly to advocate for the protection of children's rights, to help meet their basic needs and to expand their opportunities to reach their full potential. UNICEF is guided by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and strives to establish children’s rights as enduring ethical principles and international standards of behaviour towards children.1.3 Climate change is one of the biggest challenges facing children, both now and in the future. Children are the least responsible for the causes of climate change and yet bear the brunt of the impacts both now and in the future. Similarly, today’s children and future generations will bear the future consequences of inaction on climate change today- such as higher taxes to fund responses to climate change and the impact of climate related disasters. Children therefore are key stakeholders in action against climate change and under the CRC, they have a right to participate in decisions affecting them, climate change undeniably falls into this category.1.4 This submission will focus on the public understanding of children and young people to climate change, and how this links to public understanding of climate change overall. Specifically, this submission will focus on the following aspects of the Science and Technology Committee’s call for evidence:2. What is the current state of public understanding of what is meant by climate change? How has this changed in recent years?;&#xa0;2.1 In April 2013, UNICEF UK commissioned polling through IPSOS MORI about the attitudes of children in the UK and parents to climate change and its impacts.2.2 The research found that children in the UK are overwhelmingly concerned about how climate change will affect their generation. Specifically 74% of young people aged 11-16 stated that they are worried about how climate change will affect the future of the planet and believe the world will have changed as a result of climate change by the time they are adults.2.3 The findings also show that children are not only concerned about how climate change will affect them, but also how it affects children in other countries- nearly two-thirds (63%) of young people were worried about how climate change will affect other children and families in developing countries. This demonstrates growing awareness of the impact that climate change is having in developing countries, and specifically on children. UNICEF research from 2011 shows that children in developing countries are bearing the brunt of climate change, despite being the least responsible, highlighting that there are approximately 756 million children living in the top ten most vulnerable countries to climate change.2.4 Children in the UK also want to see the Government take more action on climate change to safeguard their future - 72% agreed that they want the UK Government to do more to tackle climate change.2.5 The polling also indicated strong understanding of climate change amongst children- with 89% of 11-16 years olds stating that they knew about climate change. This demonstrates strong public awareness of climate change amongst young people.2.6 As well as polling young people, a representative sample of 2004 adults were also surveyed. Parents and grandparents expressed less concern about climate change than young people, but nonetheless, over half (58%) agreed that the effects of climate change will mean their children will not grow up in the same natural environment as they did and 61% agreed that the UK Government should take more action to combat climate change.2.7 This data highlights a strong understanding and awareness of climate change and its future impacts amongst children in the UK. This is particularly notable considering that children today and future generations will feel the greatest impact of climate change.  It also shows that despite the growing fears of increased climate scepticism, children are in fact very convinced about climate change and have strong views on the need to take action.2.8 The data also shows a growing understanding amongst children and adults that climate change is an intergenerational issue and one that will overwhelming impact on today’s children and future generations. This highlights an increasing understanding of climate change as a long term phenomenon and indicates potential growing appetite for long term policy solutions and long term thinking.2.9 The strong support for further government action on climate change from parents and children also defies the current perception that the public believe the UK Government are doing too much on climate change. Our evidence demonstrates instead that when climate change is understood as an issue affecting today’s children and future generations there is strong support for action.2.10 The polling research suggests that improving understanding of climate change as an intergenerational issue and as an issue that affects children and young people today could lead to more support for action on climate change.Summary:Three quarters of UK children aged 11-16 are concerned about how climate change will affect their future and would like to see the government take more action. 61% of adults would like to see the UK Government take more action on climate changeRecommendations:- Evidence indicates that children are concerned about how climate change will affect their future. This should act as a powerful driver for policy change to ensure today’s children and future generations can survive and thrive in the face of climate change- There is a case for exploring better communication of climate change as an issue affecting children and grandchildren- this could help gain further public understanding of the long term impacts of climate change and galvanise support for long term policy action 3. How important is public understanding in developing effective climate change policy?3.1 Increased understanding of climate change often leads to increased support for climate change policy decisions. For example, the UNICEF UK/IPSOS MORI polling shows that children have strong awareness of climate change (89%) and this translates into strong support for further action on climate change - 72% of children would like to see the Government do more on climate change. In other words, stronger public understanding of climate change and its implications can result in greater engagement in climate change public policy and potentially greater support for it.3.3 UNICEF UK also believes that there is a need to involve those who are and will be affected by climate change in climate change policy to make it truly effective. UNICEF’s work internationally highlights that when children understand the risks faced by them from climate change and are included in decision making, they are able to help shape policy that truly protects them from climate change. For example, in the Philippines, UNICEF has run education programmes about climate change with children, highlighting the risks they face from climate related natural hazards such as cyclones. Following this children were consulted on government climate change adaptation strategies where they were able to cite their concerns and the risks they faced. This meant the climate change policy developed by the local government addressed the concerns of children, key stakeholders, but could also effectively protect them.3.4 The UK Department of Energy and Climate Change’s youth panel, which UNICEF UK actively supported, also showed the benefits of including children and young people in climate change decision making. Involving children and young people in the policy making around future energy pathways ensured that children (who will bear the consequences of today’s energy decision making) were able to be involved in key climate change policies that will affect their future. Their involvement also meant that they had a deeper understanding of the issues and were consequently more involved and supportive of climate change policy initiatives.&#xa0;SummaryIncreased understanding and awareness of climate change in children indicates that they are more supportive of policy action by the UK Government on climate change.Recommendations:- UNICEF UK recommends that public education on climate change will help increase support for climate change policy and action by the UK Government- UNICEF UK recommends involving key stakeholders (such as children) in climate change in the formulation of climate change policy- this will help deliver effective policy that is supported by those stakeholders and that will deliver action that will help protect them. - Specifically, the UK Government should find a way to systematically consult with children and young people on their international and domestic climate change policy4. Can lessons about public engagement with climate change policy be learned from other countries? 4.1 As children will inherit the legacy of today’s climate change decision making, and suffer the worst impacts of climate change in the future, it is right that they should be actively involved in climate change policy.&#xa0;4.2 In all countries, young people have a critical role in policy decision-making. For energy and climate mitigation policies, young people add value with their connections to cutting-edge energy technology research, global collaboration and online innovation skills. In fora that focus on appropriate adaptation and technology transfer strategies, young people often have the closest connection to climate impacts already being felt and have the most at stake when the economy and environment of their future is under discussion. &#xa0;4.3 UNICEF encourages the strategic participation of adolescents and youth in climate change policy actions at international, national, local, and institutional levels. &#xa0;4.4 The following are examples of UNICEF-supported child and youth-led climate policy initiatives that have delivered on action to tackle climate change, where lessons can be learned for practice in the UK:&#xa0;4.5 Children’s Climate Change Forum (CCF): Held alongside COP15 in Copenhagen, CCF was UNICEF’s launching pad for broader youth engagement on climate change. 164 children from 44 countries participated, with equal representation by countries heavily impacted by climate change such as Haiti, the Maldives and Kenya, alongside Denmark, New Zealand and the United States. The Forum focused on training and empowering children to pursue climate actions in their communities. &#xa0;4.6 Research based advocacy in Tajikistan: A UNICEF-initiated school-based hygiene and sanitation project supported adolescents and researchers to conduct high quality, weekly water testing across schools and communities. The resulting map demonstrated contamination in wells considered to be safe and determined key priority areas for decision makers. The adolescent researchers became strong advocates for action, convincing district health officials to improve sanitation conditions near water sources, while simultaneously educating community members to boil contaminated water before use. &#xa0;4.7 UK Department Of Energy &amp; Climate Change Youth Panel: With support from UNICEF prior to COP15, the Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) created a Youth Panel to advise government energy plans. DECC created a team of 16 young people who visited energy facilities, surveyed over 700 other young people, spoke with energy experts and helped develop an energy simulation website. Their final report was well-researched, significant, and meaningful for the DECC decision-makers in policy making.&#xa0;SummaryChildren and young people have a right to be involved in climate change policy, and their involvement can yield benefits for action on climate changeRecommendation:- UNICEF UK recommends that the UK government and other actors find a way to systematically engage and consult with children and young people on their international and domestic climate change policy&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; UNICEF UK/IPSOS MORI, April 2013 http://www.unicef.org.uk/Latest/Publications/climate-proof/  http://www.unicef.org/media/files/Climate_Change_Regional_Report_14_Nov_final.pdf