&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[Dr Kevin Madders]]]

[[[ (ESA021)]]]

[[[Profile and declaration of interest]]]1. I am a space policy consultant and visiting professor of Space Policy and Law at KU Leuven and of Information Society Law at King’s College London. I have been involved in space affairs for over 25 years, including several as an ESA official. I have acted as expert to the European Commission and ESA on space policy formation and co-organized the European Space Policy Workshops at KU Leuven which preceded and then reviewed the European Space Policy that was adopted in 2007. I served on the BNSC European Affairs Advisory Board, on which I was among those calling for a UK space agency. I am the author of A New Force at a New Frontier, which sought to unravel what had been termed the European space sector’s “intimidating complexity”. The book, which includes major UK space developments, also explored governance issues, an inquiry developed in later debate (see References). Finally, I am an evaluator for EU Framework Programme Space Calls.2. My aim with this evidence is to address what seem to me the main governance issues raised by the inquiry, not to provide an individual position on each question.3. I declare that I both advise and contract with governmental and private entities, in particular through Systemics Network International, of which I am managing partner. This evidence is, however, submitted in a personal capacity. I am subject to some confidentiality constraints.

[[[The return of serious UK commitment to space and its implications]]]4. The Committee’s inquiry is very timely. Its primary focus is of course on UK interests. And those interests have witnessed a transformation over the past decade, culminating in boosts to UK funding in ESA in 2008 and 2012, the creation of the UK Space Agency, and formation of a strategic industrial and research cluster for space around Harwell – the site since 2009 of an applications-oriented ESA Establishment. Britain is taking its place again at the top table in European space and is set to become one of the top three investors in ESA over the timeframe 2013-2018. A well-targeted contribution under ELIPS will furthermore see genuine UK participation in the International Space Station programme. These developments of course complement major existing strengths in space applications and science, while the British flair for innovation is exemplified by the Reaction Engines’ Skylon project.5. I join many from the space community in welcoming this transformation, and I will not dwell on the period that preceded it. This has been covered in my own work and in others’.  The focus with space is now on innovation for growth within a wider S&amp;T policy aimed at revamping the UK economic model. This clearly accords with UK long-term interests and rightly attracts good cross-party support. But the change in policy cannot wipe away overnight the legacy of the partial UK disengagement from space over previous decades: The UK Space Agency remains fairly small, its proportion of funding going to ESA is high in relation to the national programme, and, within ESA funding, it is striking that the UK, unlike France, Germany or Italy, is not prominent in itself thrusting one or more major R&amp;D mission programmes forward.6. The point here is that the UK has still much to do if it wants to complete its transformation in space and thereby reap the full rewards this expanding sector offers. The UK Parliament will have a key role in this respect, not only in supporting the UK Space Agency as it develops and in conducting much-needed pro-competitive reform of the Outer Space Act, but in encouraging programmes and commercial initiatives that can place Europe and the UK at the vanguard of space development. Skylon may come into question here, as may entirely new prospects such as asteroid mining, so far only being targeted only by American companies. But, whatever the UK itself does, it is plain that its capacity to go it alone in space will always remain limited. It is also difficult to conceive that the UK, whatever the outcome of a referendum on EU membership, will have much reason to change horses from the European space structures it has become so deeply embedded in since the early 1960s.7. Against this background, it becomes vital for the UK to consolidate its own position in space within a favourable European environment. And this environment, as the Committee has realized in opening its inquiry, is changing fundamentally due to the rising importance of the EU in the space field, even before the change made by the Lisbon Treaty that explicitly gave the EU space policy and programmatic competence and freedom to establish “appropriate relations” with ESA.8. The consequences for each country of this change in the European space landscape are profound. But my above remarks already indicate that the UK’s profile in ESA is not currently one that need bind its hands – a different situation than that of a country like Germany, which has a greater vested interest in the ESA status quo. I shall return to the opportunity this flexibility offers towards the end of this evidence.9. I believe it unlikely the UK will leave the EU, but one must still allow for this possibility and I do so in the following remarks. If it were to happen, the effects of withdrawal within the EU would probably be mainly budgetary for space, but not structural. The UK would be placed in a similar position to either Norway or Switzerland. Accommodations will be required for those countries under any governance reform, as the European Commission recognizes in its Communication COM 2012 671 (hereafter the “2012 Communication”).

[[[The paradigm shift in EU-ESA relations]]]10. While the UK in 2013 contributes less than 10% to ESA’s coffers, income from the EU is over 21%. If it were an ESA Member State, the EU would therefore already be ESA’s third largest contributor. But the EU is of course not a Member State, and is not allowed to be under the ESA Convention. The “third party” funding it passes through ESA is, moreover, different in kind (mainly procurement for utilization purposes rather than for major R&amp;D). And the EU spends further sums on European space research and applications that do not pass through ESA. It is true that these sums are currently relatively low but are set to increase under the Multiannual Financial Framework 2014-2020. The total the EU currently plans for space under the MFF is some €11.5 billion. When ESA was founded, it was zero. Space was also practically nowhere on the Commission’s radar. Today, it is an integral part of numerous EU policies and has made it into both the EU’s charter and European Council business.

[[[The current EU-ESA relationship and the impact of the Lisbon Treaties]]]11. This game-changing development was foreseeable from the time of the 1986 Single European Act (SEA), which endorsed a European Community R&amp;D competence, and from moves that culminated in the 1992 Maastricht Treaty. The first Communication by the European Commission on space indeed did not take long to follow (1988) and made claims whose chief political tenets of legitimacy, democratic accountability etc., one finds repeated in the 2012 Communication. A European Space Policy for the EU, ESA and their combined Member States was then arrived at, fitfully, in 2007. This underpinned a common and evolving architecture, which was then in turn endorsed in the Lisbon Treaty but left unsolved key issues of institutional convergence already plain to several commentators from the SEA onwards. Supported by an inter-institutional framework agreement only from 2004, dialogue and cooperation between the EU and ESA nevertheless slowly but surely grew across the entire period.12. In retrospect, a number of things stand out from this thumbnail history. First, it was ESA Member States which showed the greatest caution towards the kind “rapprochement” the 2012 Communication advocates. I have witnessed this first-hand over the entire period in question and it is pertinent here to mention that, based on our work in ESA, my colleague Walter Thiebaut and I suggested, in an article entitled “Two Europes in One Space”, an agreement between ESA and the European Community to facilitate institutional convergence. This seemed a self-evident need, and certain to take time and care to work out. But in the event it took twelve years to arrive at the 2004 framework agreement; it took less than ten to place men on the Moon. Meanwhile, the ESA Executive has taken some courageous positions on the relations that should prevail between the EU and ESA. In its long-term perspective document aimed at ministers, Agenda 2011, the ESA Director General grasped the nettle and proposed “to make ESA become an Agency of the EU”. His current Agenda 2015 recalls this proposal but notes “this perspective was challenged by Member States”.13. I draw the Committee’s attention to this, because it is often thought that the EU is involved in some kind of hostile take-over of ESA. This is plainly not the case. While serving its Member States, each institution is ultimately the steward of the general European interest. And the ESA Executive is in a position to understand in terms of programmes and their management the drag on Europe’s potential that results from unnecessary and protracted institutional bifurcation, whereas the signs pointing to ESA one day becoming an EU agency are unmistakeable. As a good manager, ESA therefore wants to clarify this issue to be able to get on with its real work of delivering its part of a world-class European space programme in concert with national and EU programmes. And here it is important to note that this, apparently, is the driving motive behind the Political Declaration endorsed by the ESA ministerial Council in November 2012 in its Resolution No. 4, to which I would recommend the Committee gives its attention alongside the 2012 Communication.

[[[The Member State perspective and ]]]

[[[the ]]]

[[[reform planning horizon]]]14. It is also worth noting that Member States’ perspectives were for historical reasons formed in ESA in a manner entirely divorced from the EU system. What emerged was a kind of “bottom-up” cooperative and in large part optional participative system, whose baseline common element is today ESA’s Science and Basic Technology programmes. Such a system relies either on coalescence around further commonly held programme objectives, for which there is not always scope, or on one or more Member States providing the financial and political impetus for programmes, alone or on the basis of cross-programme understandings. It is an attractive system, supported by an efficient organization in ESA and accompanied by the industrial return system, on which I am sure the Committee will be extensively briefed. In short, the system has both advantages and defects, the worst of which is that a period of disagreement over aligning interests and programme objectives can cause the system to unravel. Gaps in programmes are furthermore inevitable in such a system, which can undermine the coherence of the entire programme structure. Operational utilization activities have, in addition, generally been less well catered for and are indeed subject to major constraints under the ESA Convention. And it must not be forgotten that ESA is limited only to space, whereas the uses to which space tools can be put are far wider, especially today. Unsurprisingly, this is where Member States tend to be most united in encouraging a strong EU role in support of utilization based on the panoply of EU policies.15. But any move away from an ESA system that in practice has industrial return at its heart can strike at both national objectives and industrial capacity cultivated in some cases over decades. It is for this reason that strong caution among many Member States is not only understandable but indicated. Despite some of the language in the 2012 Communication, the Commission is perfectly aware of this but, equally, makes the point that some solution must be found. It then uses the traditional Commission approach, well tried in reforming other sectors in which Member States have major strategic interests such as telecommunications, of initiating a process with a clear and realistic planning timeframe for undertaking the necessary adjustments. Here, the target timeframe for change is 2020 to 2025, since most of the major programmatic orientations have been set to 2020. The maximum “negotiation” period prior to fundamental governance change being initiated is hence 2014 to 2018, as clarity will already be needed before the next major planning cycle.

[[[Some suggestions for a way forward]]]16. The maximum period for negotiation just estimated is based not on positions taken by the Commission and in ESA but on the difficulty of the issues that must be resolved. I know that there are hopes to resolve them already in 2014 and would indeed regard this as ideal. Delay is also not in the UK interest, since it is rebuilding its space profile and will need a stable governance environment in which to make its policy choices. But uncertainty abounds in reshaping such a complex and strategic part of the European architecture. It is hence best, I would suggest, to plan for this and to ensure a process is in place that is robust enough to handle the various issues on a rolling basis.17.  By its nature, such a process has to depart from a business as usual approach, with the different “space Europes” each busy principally with defining their own positions. If one accepts the simple premise that some form of accommodation is required under an overall EU policy umbrella (which is difficult to deny in light of the Lisbon Treaty), then it should follow that the process should be an inclusive one under the general orchestration of the EU. However, I would emphasize that – being an inherently intergovernmental question affecting an independent intergovernmental organization and a set of Member States that will probably come to include all EU ones but also some non-EU ones – it would seem appropriate that the Presidency of the European Union should take the lead role. I believe this would also set the minds of several Member States at rest.18. I would also stress that any change of space governance in Europe will affect many interests. Already some of the changes that have occurred, namely in relation to delegation of responsibilities by the EU to ESA for Galileo and GMES, have produced cause for concern. All institutional actors, but also stakeholders in the sector (and not only the major industry and operators lobbies), should be able to contribute, as should representatives of the general public including of course parliamentarians. If this additional premise is also accepted, this would then imply convening some sort of conference.19. I believe such a conference is already long over-due. A similar mechanism was, I would add, instrumental in resolving major space policy issues in the 1960s and early 1970s and gave birth to today’s ESA.20. If the suggestion for a conference approach is pursued, then I would also recommend that it address as priority overall political goals (the 2007 European Space Policy is out of date) and an overall programme plan (a goal sadly not followed through sufficiently from 2007). It is necessary to proceed from these to the desired governance architecture, which will not be as simple as a clean separation of policy elaboration in the EU and programme implementation in an EU ESA, even if this may be the main governance model many will naturally wish to explore.21. I would also suggest that, in the interests of efficacy, the essential political thrust be maintained throughout such a conference’s life. With the multiplicity of the legal issues one can think of, it would be wise to give those prominence only once agreement has been reached on the main principles. Thus, I would further suggest that the conference’s terms of reference be widely drafted so as to allow resort to the full extent of options available under the Lisbon Treaty. These might include resort to the enhanced cooperation fall-back which is there provided for. Such a mechanism, combined with amendments to ESA’s Convention and appropriate agreements, may prove apt in particular to accommodate Member States’ vital concerns and maintain programme involvement by non-EU ESA Member States and of Canada under its Cooperation Agreement.

[[[Conclusion: A smart governance architecture for Europe and the UK]]]22. My advice to the Committee in the changing environment relevant to space governance is twofold: 1) not to foreclose the option of ESA (and thus with the bulk of UK civil space investment) entering under the EU umbrella and 2) to assess, not in “one go” but stepwise over the coming approximately one year, how best to calibrate both funding and non-funding policy tools so that the UK has the chance of benefitting from the full potential space has to offer. In both regards, it might be that, for the type of programme the UK has currently prioritized, features of the EU system might in the end be the more rational option. This will not be true of all ESA Member States.

[[[References]]]Madders, K.J., A New Force at a New Frontier: Europe’s development in the space field in the light of its main actors, policies, law and activities from its beginnings up to the present, Cambridge University Press, 625 pp.Madders, K.J., and Thiebaut, W.M., “Carpe diem: Europe must make a genuine space policy now”, Space Policy, Vol. 23 (2007) 7–12.Madders, K.J., and Thiebaut, W.M., “Two Europes in one Space: The Evolution of Relations between the European Space Agency and the European Community in Space Affairs”, Journal of Space Law, Vol. 20 (1992) 117-132.Wouters, J., and Madders, K.J., “Taking Stock of Europe’s developing space policy: from the European space policy workshops to the European space policy forum”, Space Policy, Vol. 20  2004, 31-36.&#xa0;April 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;