&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[Sir Christopher Audland, KCMG, DL]]]

[[[ (CLC043)]]]&#xa0;Introductory&#xa0;1.              The House of Commons Science and Technology Committee (hereinafter the S &amp; T Committee) has announced its intention to hold an enquiry into what the public understand about climate, where people look for their information, and how that may impact on climate change policy; and it has invited written submissions. Such is the nature of the present document.&#xa0;2.              The invitation requires that each submission should include a declaration of interest. I served in the Foreign Office (&amp; then the FCO) from 1948 to 1973, and was, from 1968 to 1970, Head of the Science &amp; Technology Department, which handled FCO interests in all questions concerning the environment, the sea&#x2011;bed and the peaceful uses of atomic energy. I served in senior positions as an Official of the European Commission from 1973 to 1986; and was for the last 5 of these years - which included the period of the Chernobyl disaster - Head of the Directorate General for Energy, which handled all energy issues. Since retirement, my relevant experience has been to serve as a founder Patron of "Supporters of Nuclear Energy (SONE)"; as Vice-President and later as Executive President of Europa Nostra - the leading European level Heritage NGO; and also as founder Chairman of Friends of Eden, Lakeland &amp; Lunesdale Scenery (FELLS). Both of the two NGO's just mentioned oppose the construction of wind-turbines in inappropriate places.&#xa0;Submission&#xa0;3.              In its call for submissions, the Committee drew attention to its own Report "Devil’s bargain? Energy risks and the public" (Session 2012-13). That Report was fundamentally flawed. At no stage did it attempt to define the extent to which climate change is man-made. This has to be the key climate issue for anyone concerned with energy policy. &#xa0;4.              The published Terms of Reference of the S &amp; T Committee's Enquiry record that "In 2006, 81% of surveyed UK citizens were fairly or very concerned about climate change, compared with 76% in 2,009 in an identical tracking survey". Even more striking are the results of a survey by GlobeScan Radar, published in February, 2013, of nearly 23,000 people in 22 countries, including the UK, which found that, since 2009, the proportion of people viewing climate change as "very serious" has fallen from 62% to 49%. In these circumstances, one would have expected that the very first question the S &amp; T Committee would place before the Enquiry would be "Is&#xa0;it time for the British Government - and the EU Institutions which at present broadly agree with that Government's views on MMGW - to take a fresh look at the question to what extent climate change can realistically be regarded as 'man&#x2011;made'?". Instead, each of the seven questions in the Terms of Reference take it for granted that man is largely responsible for observed climate change.&#xa0;5.              The British Government &amp; the EU Institutions accept without question that there is a direct and close correlation between the volume of man-made Greenhouse Gases, especially CO2 Emissions, on the one hand, and global temperatures on the other. It was on those grounds that they accepted, first the Kyoto Protocol; and, second, the target set by the EU Heads of Government to source 20% of all the Union’s energy from renewable sources by 2020. The latter is held by the EU to require the UK to increase the share of renewables in our energy mix from 1.5% today, to 15% in 2020.&#xa0;6.               However, Parliament has chosen to go far beyond this challenging commitment, by imposing on the British Government the Climate Change Act of 2008, which lays upon the Secretary of State a duty to ensure that the net UK carbon account for the year 2050 is at least 80% lower than the 1990 baseline.&#xa0;7.              I would not for a moment argue that the human race has had no impact at all on the climate. But, in my submission, the whole idea of MMGW has been grotesquely exaggerated, by too many people, on the basis of highly questionable evidence, over the last quarter century. The world has been warming &amp; cooling ever since it began, around 4.5&#xa0;Bn BC. As the "Economist" has recently reminded us - see article on “The Cambrian Explosion” on p 87 of the 23 March Issue - during "The Snowball Earth" Era, which lasted from around 725 Mn. BC to around 541 Mn BC, there were a series of Ice Ages, which were, at their maxima, among the most extensive glaciations in the world's history. They alternated, though, with periods when the planet's average temperature was sometimes as high as 50 Degrees C. None of this was due to MMGW. Man was simply not around in those days. The first Homo Erectus, predecessor of Human Beings (Homo Sapiens), emerged around BC 2 Mn. Homo Sapiens came into existence in Africa ca. 200,000 BC, and rapidly spread round the world. &#xa0;&#xa0;8.              Between 1975 and 1998, there was clearly a rise in world average temperatures. In the latter year, therefore, it could have seemed reasonably logical to suggest that this was due to the rapidly increasing global emissions of CO2, which averaged 1.5 ppm per annum over that period (NOAA data).. In 1998, however, the increase of world temperatures halted. Since then, for 15 years, global average temperatures have been virtually static. During the same period, global CO2 emissions rose even faster, at 1.85 ppm per annum, or almost 8%. The argument that CO2 emissions contribute to an important extent to climate change has therefore been steadily weakening, year by year, for 15 years, and is no longer valid&#xa0;9.              Most reasonably well informed people are aware of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change of 9 May 1992. Its ultimate aim was declared to be the stabilisation of greenhouse gas [GHG] concentrations in the atmosphere at a level which would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. It was followed by the Kyoto Protocol (to the Convention) of 11 Dec 1997. This set targets, though for Developed Countries only: amongst the latter, moreover, there were notable exceptions from the ratification process, including the USA &amp; Australia. The key aim was that Contracting States should – over the period 2008 to 2012 – each reduce their GHG emissions by 5% compared with 1990.&#xa0;10.              In December 2007, there took place in Bali a Conference of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, along with certain other countries, making a total of over 180 States. This Conference took into account the work of the International Panel for Climate Change (IPCC). It agreed two key documents. The first was the Bali Road Map. This envisaged the preparation of a new Agreement on Climate Change, intended for adoption at a similar conference in Copenhagen in December 2009. The&#xa0;preparatory work was entrusted to an Ad Hoc Working Group on Long&#x2011;Term Cooperative Action [AHWG-LTCA]. The Working Group was asked to provide a progress report in time for consideration at a similar conference in Poznan, Poland, in December 2008. The second was the Bali Action Plan. This document is essentially a list of rather general ideas to be studied by the AHWG-LTCA.&#xa0;11.              In December, 2009, there took place in Copenhagen another Conference of the Parties, which achieved nothing much, except for agreement to continue the work of the AHWG-LTCA. There were further such Conferences in Cancún (2010), Durban (2011) and Doha (2012). The last one agreed to extend the Kyoto Protocol to 2020, and to set a date of 2015 for the development of a successor document, to be implemented from 2020. Otherwise, the Parties have achieved remarkably little.&#xa0;12.              The work of all these Conferences has been prepared by the IPCC. Its Reports have been the subject of much criticism by scientists, and other people in a position to understand climatological questions. In its 2007 Report, for example, the IPCC made the central claim that the world's glaciers were melting so fast that those in the Himalayas could ‘very likely’ vanish by 2035. This was at once sharply contested by many scientists. And, in January, 2010, the IPCC itself released a Statement acknowledging that, in the case study on the Himalayan glaciers, ‘the clear and well-established standards of evidence, required by the IPCC procedures were not applied properly’. In other words, they admitted that the claim was unsustainable. It has been suggested that the figure resulted from the mis-reading of the figure 2350 from an earlier Report.&#xa0;13.              The attitudes of the IPCC have been criticised by, inter alios, Professor John Beddington, who was appointed in 2010 as the Government’s Chief Scientific Adviser. In an Article published by "The Times" on 27 January of that year, he said that climate scientists should be less hostile to sceptics who questioned the theory of MMGW. ‘I don’t think it's healthy to dismiss proper scepticism. Science grows and improves in the light of criticism. There is a fundamental uncertainty about climate change prediction that can’t be changed. Certain unqualified statements have been unfortunate. We have a problem in communicating uncertainty. ... All these predictions have to be caveated by saying: “there’s a level of uncertainty there”’.&#xa0;14.              In June 2011, the Global Warming Policy Foundation published a Report on climate change by Lord Turnbull. Few people could speak on this subject with more authority: Lord Turnbull was, successively, Head of the Department of the Environment (1994-98), then Head of the Treasury (1998-2002), and finally Cabinet Secretary &amp; Head of the Civil Service (2002-2005).  In his Report he stated the following. There is huge controversy about the relative contribution of man-made CO2 versus natural forces such as the sun, cosmic rays, clouds and the oceans. Many scientists would support an alternative hypothesis that the globe has been on a gentle warming trend since the end of the Little Ice Age around two hundred years ago, with alternating periods measured in decades of faster and slower growth, or even periods of moderate decline. Such an alternative view would not justify the alarmism which characterizes much of the public debate. The Really Inconvenient Truth is that the propositions of the IPCC do not bear the weight of certainty with which they are expressed. However, he wrote, the purpose of his paper was not to argue that there is another truth which should become the new consensus, but to point out the doubts that exist about the IPCC viewpoint, and the serious flaws in its procedures. It was also to question why the UK Government has placed such heavy bets on one particular source of advice. The economic policy choices being made would not minimize the cost of mitigation. The paper concluded with a call for more humility from scientists, more rational reflection from politicians, and more challenge from our parliamentarians.&#xa0;15.              On the other side of the Atlantic, in the USA, 31,000 Academics have signed a petition to the US&#xa0;Government rejecting the idea that man has been responsible for Global Warming. 9,000 of them hold Ph D Degrees, mostly in Engineering. The Petition was first adopted in 1998, and re&#x2011;adopted in 2007. Issued by the Oregon Institute of Science and Medicine in response to Al Gore’s film on Climate Change, ‘An&#xa0;Inconvenient Truth’, it says that ‘There is no convincing evidence that human release of GHG is causing, or will, in the foreseeable future, cause catastrophic heating of the Earth’s Climate’. A similar statement was made by over 500 scientists, researchers, economists &amp; policy makers, who attended an International Conference on Climate Change at New York on 4 March, 2008. (The&#xa0;Manhattan Declaration). It said, inter alia, that, in the historical record, the rise in CO2 [levels] has always followed periods of warming (as the effects of disturbances on the Sun and the Earth created more CO2); and not preceded them, as the man made global warming (MMGW) theorists maintain. It likewise declared that ‘there is no convincing evidence that CO2 emissions from modern industrial activity has in the past, is now, or will in the future, cause catastrophic climate change’.&#xa0;16.              In spite of this widespread and increasing scepticism about MMGW, the British Government and the EU – which both subscribed to the Kyoto Protocol – continue to hold that GHG, &amp; notably CO2 emissions, should be reduced. They argue that Scientific Research has shown, after coring the Antarctic ice for 3&#xa0;kilometres, covering 740,000 years, that today’s greenhouse gas levels are the highest for 440,000 years; and that much smaller increases have been linked to a significant degree of global warming. CO2 levels hover around 200 parts per million [ppm] during ice ages, and 280 ppm during interglacial periods. Now they are around 394 ppm. They choose to ignore the scientific theory - see paragraph  15 - about the relationship between past rises in CO2 levels, and their having followed periods of warming and not preceded them,.17.              The problem of GHG emissions of human origin must, in any case, be kept in correct perspective. The world's climate is always at risk from other causes - for example a meteor strike. GHG can emerge in nature – e.g.&#xa0;through massive volcanic explosions, as at Krakatoa. And they are by no means the only influence on our climate. Sunspots constitute another major one. For 12,000 years we have been in the run-down from the last ice&#x2011;age. Glaciers have been receding. But there have been speed&#x2011;ups and slow&#x2011;downs in the process - often very large. There were mini&#x2011;Ice&#x2011;Ages in the Dark Ages (540&#x2011;950); and again between 1300 and 1850. These produced intense cold, untimely frosts and widespread famine. The production of GHG in that period was insignificant by comparison with today. It should also be borne in mind that fossil-fuel burning is not the only source of CO2 emissions. Currently 7,333 MT of CO2 are released annually, as forests are destroyed. (The latter process is politely called ‘change of land use’). American researchers have also discovered that the amount of water high in the atmosphere is far more influential on world temperatures than previously thought. A study, published in the journal Science [January 2010], says that a 10 % drop in humidity 10&#xa0;miles above the Earth's surface explains why global temperatures have been stable since the start of the 21st century, despite the rise in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. A rise in water vapour in the 1980’s and 90’s may also explain why temperatures shot up so quickly in the previous two decades, they say.&#xa0;18.              It seems clear that the last global cold spell ended in 1975. The argument for climate change is therefore based on only 37 years of experience. But Global warming ceased in 1997, and has not since resumed. In short, temperatures across the world are not increasing as they should, according to the fundamental theory behind global warming – the greenhouse gas effect. Something else is happening, and it is vital that we find out what; or else we may go on spending hundreds of billions of Pounds, Euros or Dollars needlessly. One is led to the conclusion that either the hypothesis of global warming induced by carbon dioxide holds, but its effects are being modified in some unexplained way; or else the working hypothesis does not stand the test of data. That is what the S &amp; T Committee should be considering.19.              Writing as one who was the Senior Official in the European Commission's then Directorate-General of Energy. I would argue that neither the EU nor the British Government today have any coherent energy policy. It is blindingly obvious that - if the lights are to be kept on - the British Government will have to change direction. It is appalling that the said Government, which claims to accept the need for more nuclear power, has not brought about the start of building a single nuclear power reactor since the last one was opened at Sizewell in 1995. The Government has also achieved no progress towards the creation of underground storage capacity for the disposal of high level nuclear waste. 20.              The EU, the British Government, and all the UK's main Political Parties have, ever since the Kyoto Protocol of 1997, committed themselves to the theory that CO2 emissions have a major impact on the world's climate. The Government has spent colossal sums of money on trying to reduce those emissions. Much of this money has been found by levies on British energy consumers. It is understandable that the Government should now be reluctant to admit that their claims regarding the impact of CO2 were grossly exaggerated. But it is also inexcusable that the S &amp; T Committee should avoid even considering the issue at all, whilst itself recognising that a massive &amp; growing proportion of the electorate have grave doubts about the matter.  &#xa0;April 2013&#xa0;