

[[[Written evidence from ]]]

[[[the UK Centre for Tobacco Control Studies (LTC 32)]]]This submission is made on behalf of the UK Centre for Tobacco Control Studies, a UKCRC Public Health Research Centre of Excellence established in 2008 and comprising a network of leading tobacco control researchers from ten UK universities. A full list of the researchers involved in the Centre, and background information on the objectives and activity of the Centre, is available at www.ukctcs.org. Tobacco smoking is highly addictive and the largest avoidable cause of ill-health, chronic disease and premature death in the UK. The adverse effects of smoking contribute to the causation and/or exacerbation of all of the chronic conditions listed by the Select Committee in this call for evidence, with the possible exception of epilepsy. Preventing smoking is crucial to the primary and secondary prevention of these chronic conditions. As particular examples, smoking causes over 80% of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and lung cancer in the UK, and smoking cessation is the only intervention that has a significant impact on disease progression in COPD. Around 20% of deaths from ischaemic heart disease, and 60% of those from aortic aneurysm, are attributable to smoking, and smoking prevention contributed more to the decline in mortality from heart disease in the UK over recent decades than almost all other interventions combined. Smoking among people with mental health problems accounts for the majority of reduced life expectancy of this group, and has been particularly neglected; in contrast to the progressive downward trend in smoking prevalence, to around 20%, in the general population, the prevalence of smoking among people with mental health problems has remained static at around 40% for the past two decades. Any strategy to improve and prevent morbidity and mortality from long term conditions should therefore have smoking prevention and harm reduction at its core. It is of particular importance to promote all population-level preventive strategies, including the use of price, media campaigns, smoke-free policies, preventing direct and indirect advertising and promotion (for example through smoking in films marketed to children and young people) and pursuing harm reduction strategies by making alternative sources of nicotine available to the general population. At individual level, it is also essential to build smoking cessation and harm reduction into the delivery of routine care for all chronic and long-term conditions. This is especially important for those with mental health problems, for whom smoking remains culturally accepted and even facilitated by healthcare professionals, who should instead be providing treatments and support to help smokers to quit. A recent joint report by the Royal College of Physicians and Royal College of Psychiatrists, led by UKCTCS members but with contributions from over 30 experts, drew attention to the major impact that smoking has in reducing quantity and quality of life among people with mental health problems. Key conclusions include: Recent draft guidance published by the National Institute for Clinical Excellence on smoking cessation in secondary care settings, and on tobacco harm reduction, provide the practical guidance necessary to ensure that smoking cessation interventions become properly integrated into NHS care delivery. We recommend that the Committee considers this guidance, and ways to ensure implementation, and particularly in relation to mental health settings, in its review of services for chronic and long-term conditions. Preventing smoking probably has more to offer in terms of preventing and ameliorating long-term conditions than any other measure. The UKCTCS is an ESRC funded Investment. The views and statements expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the ESRC

[[[.]]]May 2013 Twigg L, Moon G, Walker S. The smoking epidemic in England. London: Health Development Agency; 2004 Twigg L, Moon G, Walker S. The smoking epidemic in England. London: Health Development Agency; 2004 Unal B, Critchley JA, Capewell S. Explaining the Decline in Coronary Heart Disease Mortality in England and Wales Between 1981 and 2000. Circulation 2004;109:1101-1107. Royal College of Physicians, Royal College of Psychiatrists. Smoking and mental health. London: RCP; 2013 National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Smoking cessation in secondary care: acute, maternity and mental health services. NICE: http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/live/13017/63459/63459.pdf; 2013 (accessed 23 Apr. 2013) National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Tobacco - harm reduction. NICE: http://guidance.nice.org.uk/PHG/Wave23/23; 2012 (accessed 27 Feb. 2013)