

[[[Written evidence from ]]]

[[[the British Dermatological Nursing Group]]]

[[[ (LTC 76)]]]&#xa0;The British Dermatological Nursing is a professional membership organisation representing nurses working within dermatology.&#xa0;Summary&#xa0;Many dermatological conditions are long term and the impact of living with these conditions can be devastating both physically and psychologically on the patient. Whilst conditions such as psoriasis and eczema are fairly common in the population, there are many dermatological conditions that are rare and therefore require more specialised care.&#xa0;Dermatology nurses are a key component to any service. They provide a wide range of treatments as well as running nurse led services providing support and education to patients with common chronic dermatological condition. In many instances, clinical nurse specialists work autonomously providing care and management of patients with chronic dermatological conditions. Many nurses are now non medical prescribers enabling them to diagnose and prescribe a treatment plan in conjunction with the patient. This provides a time efficient service to patients and also frees up consultants time.&#xa0;Nurses are trained to care for people holistically not just treating a disease or condition. We have the innate ability to work with the patient to determine treatment plans that fit into the patient’s life whilst acknowledging the patient’s limitations and other constraints on their time. Nurses can often offer longer patient appointment times in order to undertake patient education and practical demonstration in relation to topical dermatological treatments. This education and practical support is key to improving adherence to treatment. &#xa0;Nurses have the ability to build up a rapport with patients and often patients feel more relaxed with nurses and therefore offer a more realistic account of their condition and treatment. Good communication is a key skill for any nurse. We are trained to focus our care on the whole patient and can very successfully co-ordinate care and treatment that fits into the patient’s life outside of the disease.&#xa0;All nurses should work within their own competence. Building up skills and competence takes time and supervision. Dermatological care cannot be learnt solely by reading a textbook or attending a course. It also involves working with expert nurses and consultants clinically to develop the high levels of knowledge, skills and competency required to practice safely and to provide quality patient outcomes. Peer support is very important and dermatology nurses rely heavily upon our consultant colleagues to provide this support particularly in relation to complex or less common conditions.&#xa0;Our recent workforce survey identified that dermatology nursing is primarily practised in secondary care with only pockets of dermatology nursing identified in primary care throughout England (1). The British Dermatological Nursing Group believes that local nursing services in primary care are already overwhelmed and therefore not in a position to take on the management and care of this large population of patients with long term dermatological conditions.&#xa0;Nurses in primary care provide care for a wide range of conditions and therefore do not at present have the skills and competencies in dermatological care. They cannot be considered experts in a range of conditions. Furthermore, they cannot be expected to be experts in dermatology if they have never had high level exposure to the speciality.&#xa0;Dermatology is not high on the agenda for undergraduate nurse training and many nurses never experience the specialty during their training. Inpatient dermatology departments were the breeding ground for the many expert dermatology nurses of today when numerous student nurses had placements within these units. Whilst we acknowledge that large inpatient departments are no longer cost effective in modern healthcare, we question how nurses will be able to gain exposure to dermatology when services are fragmented across a range of healthcare providers.&#xa0;In times of dermatology service reconfiguration over the years, nurses have been instrumental in service innovations to continue to provide a quality patient centred service. Day treatment dermatology services and nursing liaison posts to bridge the gap between primary and secondary care are excellent examples of how nurses have adapted to this change. &#xa0;Our main concern is that primary care nursing services are not ready to take on the care of this large group of patients and that patient care and experience will be compromised if investment is not available to develop the nursing component of a primary care based dermatology service. The existing primary care nursing workforce needs exposure to dermatology and the support from employers to do so. Community based service providers need to build in a robust nursing component into a dermatology service in order to sustain the service and meet quality standards and guidelines for dermatological treatment and care of patients with skin conditions. Primary care dermatology services will require audit against these frameworks. Nurses however should not be viewed as a cheaper alternative to dermatologists but a valuable resource in a multidisciplinary team.&#xa0;May 2013&#xa0;Reference(1) British Dermatological Nursing Group (2013) Dermatology Nursing Services: Results of a National Survey. Dermatological Nursing, 12 (1) 60 – 65.&#xa0;&#xa0;