&#xa0;

[[[Joint wr]]]

[[[itten evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[Professor Greg Philo and Dr Catherine Happer]]]

[[[ (CLC51)]]]Executive Summary1. There are two crucial points which we want to make.  The first is that the key to changing environmental behaviours lies in the imposition of constraints on public actions.  We found widespread sympathy with the issue of climate change, and broad acceptance that certain behaviours would have to be curbed or de-incentivised.  But there is little trust in the feasibility or potential impact of encouraging changes in individual behaviour.  Change would therefore come from new public constraints to which everyone must accede – as, for example, in the case of the compulsory wearing of seat belts.  In the same way people would accept, say, constraints on air travel if it were seen as a public good and applying to all.2. To generate a consensus around such policies requires a new approach to media and the dissemination of expert knowledge.  Our research shows that politicians as a group are burdened with a very low level of public trust.  New messages on climate change are likely to be seen as merely the expression of private interests.  Yet the input of politicians is crucial since they as a group can set agendas in terms of media coverage and can command regular access to key information providers such as the BBC.  The solution to this problem is to form a close bond with scientists, who still enjoy a high level of public trust.  The scientists must be seen as stimulating the debate and informing the political actions.  This was the key to the success of the AIDS/HIV campaigns and to long term changes in health related behaviours such as smoking.  This model provides the possibilities of successful political action based on a high degree of social consent.  About3. For over thirty years The Glasgow University Media Group (GUMG) has promoted the development of new methodologies and substantive research in the area of media and communications. Professor Greg Philo has been the Research Director of the group for 20 years.   In that time it has pioneered research methods focussing on the use of language in news and other media formats and has investigated how meanings are established for audiences. The studies are used extensively across the social sciences and by researchers in areas such as risk analysis, mental health and other areas of social policy. Greg has presented findings at both the Institute of Biology and the Royal College of Psychiatrists.  The work has been widely published and Greg has been invited to present our studies at a range of international fora, including Paris 2004, Sorbonne nouvelle and Paris VIII  universities, Amsterdam 2004, International Documentary Festival, national conferences of the Media and Cultural Studies Association of Britain, 2008 and Images of Islam international conference, Manchester University, 2008. Other lectures by invitation include, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, 2009 and Al Jazeera Forum Qatar 2011. 4. Dr Catherine Happer was awarded a First in Sociology from the University of Glasgow and the Adam Smith prize as the top student of her year, then went on to complete a PhD in communications from Lancaster University. She worked in the BBC audience research department and later as a Television Researcher/Assistant Producer before returning to the University of Glasgow as Research Associate at the Glasgow University Media Group to work on a UKERC-funded project along with Chatham House looking at communications around climate change and energy security.  This work has been presented to representatives of the Foreign Office, the Department for Energy and Climate Change and from many other NGOs, think tanks and activist groups. In 2013 she was invited to present the work to the European Climate Communications Officers Network (ECCO) conference in Oslo. Along with Professor Philo, she is currently co-authoring a book called Communicating Climate Change and Energy Security: New Methods in Understanding Audiences, to be published by Routledge in October.Findings from the UKERC-funded study: 5. The current state of public understanding of climate change is one of high confusion and low understanding.    There is blanket awareness of the term but only a small minority can give a clear and consistent explanation of the potential causes and risks without prompting.  Whilst the majority (86%) see human behaviour as a cause of climate change, there is no consensus on it being the primary cause.  Just over a tenth of our sample (14%) did not believe that anthropogenic climate change was happening.   The main reason for scepticism was the belief that changes in climate take place historically, and the current changes are simply part of natural cycles.  However, the large majority (88%) believe that action on climate change is important, even if they are not sure exactly what that might mean.  &#xa0;6. We also found a marked tendency to use climate change as an umbrella term for a number of other environmental issues such as pollution and population growth.  There is a widespread causal connection with climate change and the ozone layer.  For example, in our research, the ozone layer was associated with climate change with far greater frequency than, say, CO2 emissions.  The most frequently made association across our sample (by 30%) was with weather changes directly experienced such as changing seasonal patterns and wetter Summers, though extreme weather at the local and global level, most often drawn from media accounts, was also named.  7. In terms of changes over time in public understanding, a very useful overview of the British public’s attitudes and understandings has been done by Upham el al (2009) which shows that awareness and self-reported knowledge of climate change has been rising over the last two decades.  However a confusion of depletion of the ozone layer with climate change, for example, has remained fairly consistent in this time.  8. The attribution of trust and credibility in relation to sources of information on climate science and policy is a complex process in an environment in which there are multiple voices engaged in the debate across a range of media.  We found that television news is still the first place that people hear about what is happening in the world, though they sometimes follow TV reports with independent research on the internet in order to provide clarity or to substantiate what has been reported.  In this sense, credibility is weighed up in relation to consistency of information and the accountability of the individual speaker.  However, we found that the BBC, across media, remains a highly trusted source – it was felt to be the least partial, and most serious about addressing the issues.  9. A further group to which a high level of trust was attributed was the scientists, academics and other experts – speakers who are directly involved in research, and possessed of the expertise and knowledge which other sources such as journalists and television producers would draw on in producing media accounts.  However, in spite of the trust invested in the scientists and other experts, questions were raised about the validity of the science of climate change.  There were two aspects to this: the first is the suggestion that the arguments around climate change are theoretical and cannot be easily proved or disproved, and the second is that, as a result, the scientists contradict each other and there is a lack of consistency within the science community.  We found that, without prompting, participants rarely referred to the existence of any consensus amongst the scientists, although a recent survey showed that 97% of peer-reviewed scientific papers agree that man-made climate change is happening.  Instead the perceived ‘woolly’ nature of the evidence led to a belief that the science was open to interpretation.  It was further widely believed that a range of speakers, such as politicians and representatives from the business community, interpreted the science to meet their own agendas.  The view that media coverage was agenda-led - and, in the extreme, mere ‘propaganda’ - was widely expressed. 10. Politicians were most named (by 28%) as the source not to be trusted on climate change, which reflected a wider sense of distrust and cynicism about public figures in general.  The expenses scandal of 2009 was cited as a key reason for this, but broken manifesto pledges and the lack of attention paid to public protests were also mentioned.  The lack of trust in political players in general was transferred to their handling of climate change and implementation of policy.  The low level of public trust combined with the belief in the lack of solidity of the scientific evidence led to difficulty in knowing who to trust, which our research showed had a direct impact on levels of engagement with the issue.  11. In view of the role of Government Departments and members of the scientific community in communicating climate science, it is our strong belief that there should be a shift in focus with the latter taking a more public role and propelling the arguments forward in the public sphere.  The arguments need to be contextualised by the scientific knowledge, de-politicised and presented as evidence-based rather than as conjecture.  There are however difficulties associated with this.  Firstly that the science is complex and journalists struggle to find ways to engage audiences which is, of course, their primary concern.  Further, partially as a result of this aim, the media have often drawn on ‘experts’ - sometimes called climate sceptics - without the appropriate credentials to speak on climate science to fuel debate.  There is evidence that these sceptics are a well organised and well funded group with the aim of discrediting climate science and downplaying the need for action – as a result they are vocal in publicising their views.  This stands in contrast to climate scientists and other experts in the area of climate change who are reluctant to do so.  However if the scientists developed high profile public roles, it would reduce the capacity for the sceptics to challenge their credibility.  This would make it simpler for audiences to identify those sources of trust and to focus on accurate information.  Our research also showed the importance of the reinforcement of media messages suggesting a key part of building these public roles is to be prolific in spreading their knowledge.  12. The role of the political speakers in this process lies in their agenda-setting powers.  In recent years an equal if not more significant problem in climate change communications is that there has not been enough of it.  Since 2010 there has been a global and national decline in the coverage of climate change and our research showed that this impacts on the public’s sense of it being a pressing problem.  Simply if it is in the news, it is more likely to be thought of as a priority and to play on people’s minds.  This decline is due to a number of factors but one reason is that the media take their lead from the official sources upon which they are reliant on for their information.  Politicians are the most significant of this group. The BBC, in particular, sets its agenda on the basis of the political debate as a key aspect of its role is to present the range of views in a democracy in which parliament is seen to represent the will of the people.  In essence therefore the boundaries of parliamentary debate form the core of the political arguments which it features.  Climate change has not been a major priority of the coalition government – and the dissent over climate change and related issues was exposed through the internal conflict over the Energy Bill and the lack of promotion of the latter from the major political players including the Prime Minister since coming into office, suggest a real lack of political will in this area.   The media therefore has reflected that lack of priority. 13. Whilst we would argue the scientists should take centre stage in the coverage, it therefore lies with the politicians to open up the media landscape.  Politicians need to promote the issue and raise the profile of the scientists and independent experts, such as engineers, as a unified group who are arguing the case for evidence-based policy.  Central to this is the communicative relationship between scientists, Government Departments and journalists from the full range of media, but the evidence must be seen to be coming from the scientists.  In relation to the aforementioned difficulties that journalists face in covering as complex an issue as climate change, leading figures, such as Professor Lord Stern, have argued for a communicative approach that frames the issue in terms of risk rather than uncertainty, which is something both journalists and audiences struggle to grapple with.  Simple messages about risks in relation to extreme weather events, for example, which centralise the scientific arguments about risks may be a potential way forward.  14. With climate change, perhaps more so than any other policy issue, it is imperative that the public understand the issues and the importance of action to be taken.  Improved understanding and greater sympathy with the issue can both legitimise policy action and therefore facilitate change at the collective level.  This is particularly important in the context of austerity in which any investment and expenditure need to be justified.  The reduction in carbon emissions - by 34% by 2020 and at least 80% by 2050 - enshrined in law through the 2008 Climate Change Act will not be met without individual action. The likelihood of effective collective action happens in the intersection between sympathetic attitudes and structurally imposed and supported behaviours.  Our research showed that there is currently little faith in the power of individual behaviours conducted in isolation.  The cynicism about public figures, and resultant feelings of distrust, found in our research indicates that initiatives which rely on voluntary behavioural changes are unlikely to be widely engaged with.  However, we did find in our groups, in the majority, a clear sense that decisive action would have to be taken.  There was an acceptance, for example, that air travel might have to be curbed or made more expensive.  Such action was expected to be initiated at the governmental or local authority level.  It seems likely that if a clear lead was given then the public would, however grudgingly, accept it.  This is actually the history of public acceptance of legislation on issues such as wearing seat belts in cars or motor cycle crash helmets, but it does require organised collective action.  Counter to this, in relation to the role of public communications about climate change policy and initiatives, there is little point in driving home the message about behavioural change unless there are simple, effective and supported solutions open to people from which they can see the real benefits. 15. In relation to the question of the knowledge and expertise that the Government have in the area of public understanding of climate science and the response to public policies, there has been some criticism of the way in which DEFRA, and other agencies, attempt to motivate social behaviours by the use of external drivers such as pro-environmental materials which does not take account of broader systemic issues.  But whilst these issues are clearly significant – people are unlikely to take up cycling to work without the protection of a network of cycle lanes - we argue this does not sufficiently account for the way the media shape possibilities within those bounds.   The range of the work of the Glasgow University Media group has showed the conditions under which new information produced sometimes radical changes in behaviour – for example, in our work on HIV/AIDS, we analysed the differing effects of the government campaign on changes in condom use and sexual behaviour.  The link between smoking and cancer has also clearly produced substantial behavioural change.  But there are also examples in which new information does not produce such changes and the literature illustrates that information on climate change often fails to do so.  Our research would strongly suggest that one of the reasons is that the information in the area of climate change is so widely contested that there is no simple understanding which could lead to engagement with or without all the other cultural and social considerations.  There is also a lack of research looking into the kinds of information, and factors such as source, context and media, which might lead to commitments to alter behaviour – which would also allow for the potential impact of other factors which might overwhelm responses to information, as well as those cases in which the opposite is the case.  It is this lack that our research sought to redress and the related question of what would be the most effective approach to communications about climate change – which we have addressed in this statement to some degree - we believe needs further research.  Notes The project report is available at: http://www.chathamhouse.org/publications/papers/view/188145&#xa0;June 2013&#xa0; Upham, P., Whitmarsh, L., Poortinga, W., Purdam, K., Darnton, A., McLachlan, C. and Devine-Wright, P. (2009) ‘Public Attitudes to Environmental Change: A Selective Review of Theory and Practice. A Research Synthesis for the Living with Environmental Change Programme’, Research Councils UK, http://www.lwec.org.uk/sites/default/files/001_Public%20attitudes%20to%20environmental%20change_final%20report_301009_1.pdf (accessed: 5th April, 2013).   John Cook&#xa0;et al (2013) ‘Quantifying the consensus on anthropogenic global warming in the scientific literature’, Environ. Res. Lett.&#xa0;

[[[8]]]&#xa0;024024.  doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/2/024024. Research conducted by The Guardian and discussed in these articles:  Goldenberg, S.  (2013) ‘Media campaign against wind farms funded by anonymous conservatives’, The Guardian, 15th February 2013, http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2013/feb/15/media-campaign-windfarms-conservatives and Monbiot, G. (2013) ‘The educational charities that do PR for the rightwing ultra-rich’ in The Guardian, 18th February, 2013, http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/feb/18/charities-pr-rightwing-ultra-rich Fischer, D. (2013) ‘Climate coverage, dominated by weird weather, falls further in 2012’ The Daily Climate, 2nd Jan, 2013,  http://wwwp.dailyclimate.org/tdc-newsroom/2013/01/2012-climate-change-reporting   Shove E, (2010) ‘Beyond the ABC: climate change policy and theories of social change’, Environment and Planning A 42:6, pp. 1273 – 1285.  