VEP 0021&#xa0;

[[[Written Submission from Liberty VEP0021]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[About Liberty]]]&#xa0;Liberty (The National Council for Civil Liberties) is one of the UK’s leading civil liberties and human rights organisations. Liberty works to promote human rights and protect civil liberties through a combination of test case litigation, lobbying, campaigning and research.&#xa0;

[[[Liberty Policy]]]&#xa0;Liberty provides policy responses to Government consultations on all issues which have implications for human rights and civil liberties. We also submit evidence to Select Committees, Inquiries and other policy fora, and undertake independent, funded research.&#xa0;Liberty’s policy papers are available athttp://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/publications/1-policy-papers/index.shtml &#xa0;

[[[Introduction]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;3.              The current Prime Minister confirmed on 3rd November 2010, that proposals would be brought forward to overturn the blanket ban and an announcement in December 2012 suggested that offenders imprisoned for less than four years would be permitted to vote in Parliamentary elections unless a judge considered this inappropriate when passing sentence. In February 2011 the Commons Parliamentary and Constitutional Reform Committee reaffirmed the deeply concerning legal implications of the UK failing to implement a judgment against it. In March 2011, in the case of Greens and MT v United Kingdom, the Government sought to challenge the deadline for implementation of the judgment in Hirst. This appeal was rejected by the Grand Chamber of the ECtHR, but in September 2011, the Court did grant the UK an extension, pending the decision in the related case of Scoppola v Italy. Final judgment in this case was given in May 2012, triggering a further six month deadline for the Government to act. In October 2012, the Attorney General, the Rt Hon Dominic Grieve QC MP stressed, in evidence to the Justice Select Committee, that whilst parliamentary sovereignty remains intact, the question for the Government was whether it wished to be in breach of its international obligations. A month later a draft Bill was finally brought forward setting out three possible responses to the Court’s ruling on prisoner voting, namely, lifting the ban for prisoners serving less than four years, lifting the ban for those serving less than six months or restating the existing blanket ban. The draft legislation is now subject to a period of pre-legislative scrutiny by the Joint Committee on the draft Voting Eligibility (Prisoners) Bill, which will report back in October this year.   &#xa0;

[[[The right to vote]]]&#xa0;4.              The right to vote is protected by Article 3, Protocol 1 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and given effect in our law through the Human Rights Act. It is a qualified right and does not prevent a state from imposing conditions on the right to vote, provided that the conditions pursue a legitimate aim and are not disproportionate. Our human rights framework simply requires the holding of “free elections at reasonable intervals by secret ballot, under conditions which will ensure the free expression of the opinion of the people in their choice of legislature.”  To reflect the broad spectrum of approaches adopted by different member states the ECtHR affords a wide margin of appreciation to national authorities, meaning that the UK has significant leeway in deciding how to protect the right to vote at a national level. In Hirst, the Court took issue with the blanket and arbitrary nature of the ban imposed in the UK, which applies regardless of the offence committed or the length of sentence. The Court did not require that the UK enfranchise the prison population at large, nor was it prescriptive about the steps which should be taken by the UK to bring itself in line with its domestic and international legal obligations. Against this background, it is difficult to see why the judgment has provoked such criticism in Parliament. &#xa0;5.              While different countries take a variety of approaches to the issue, there has been an increasing trend among democracies all over the world away from complete disenfranchisement of prisoners. The UK is amongst a tiny group of Council of Europe countries including Lichtenstein, Hungary and Estonia which maintain a blanket ban. Many European countries, including Denmark, Ireland, Finland, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland have no restrictions on prisoners voting. Further afield, in South Africa, where all prisoners can vote, the Constitutional Court has affirmed that:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           “[t]he universality of the franchise is important not only for nationhood and               democracy. The vote of each and every citizen is a badge of dignity and personhood.               Quite literally, it says that everybody counts.” &#xa0;Meanwhile the Canadian Supreme Court has stated that denying the vote "countermands the message that everyone is equally worthy and entitled to respect under the law". In other countries the enfranchisement of prisoners is based either on the length of sentence or the type of offence committed. In some European countries, for example France, judges have the power to allow or withdraw a prisoner’s right to vote under certain circumstances whilst in Australia and New Zealand, the length of sentence determines voting rights. In Italy, Malta and Poland amongst other states, bans are limited to those convicted of serious crimes, whilst in Austria prisoners can vote unless their crime relates to the undermining of electoral processes, for example electoral fraud. &#xa0;6.              Thankfully, in the UK, we have progressed from a time when only a tiny fraction of the population was allowed to participate in the important democratic processes that determine how society functions and who makes the laws by which citizens are bound. Throughout the centuries the categories of people granted voting rights in this country has expanded until, in 1969, citizens over the age of 18 were given the right to vote. The only adult nationals who cannot vote in general elections are now prisoners, hereditary Members of the House of Lords, life Peers and patients detained in psychiatric hospitals.  Liberty believes that suffrage for prisoners should be seen as a step forward in the progressive realisation of the inherent value of all human beings and the fundamental importance of the right to participate in free and open elections. &#xa0;

[[[The present proposals]]]&#xa0;The likely legal consequences, both domestically and internationally, of legislating to re-state the existing ban&#xa0;7.              One option presented in the draft Bill is to re-legislate for the present position to be maintained – i.e. disqualifying all prisoners serving custodial sentences from voting. The legal and diplomatic repercussions of such a step – both domestically and internationally cannot be overstated. First and perhaps most important, re-legislating for an automatic, blanket and indiscriminate ban on prisoners voting would put the UK directly in breach of its obligations under international law following the decision of the Grand Chamber of the ECtHR in Hirst No 2 where the Court held that the blanket voting exemption of all people serving prison sentences at the time of an election is in breach of Protocol 1, Article 3 of the ECHR.&#xa0;8.              Internationally, the consequences of not complying with the judgment are grave. The UK has undertaken to abide by the final judgment of the Court in any case to which it is a party. Protocol 14 of the ECHR came into force in 2010 amending Article 46 of the Convention and allows referrals by the Committee of Ministers (CoM) to the Grand Chamber were the CoM considers that a Member State has failed to comply with a Court decision and thereby failed to fulfil its obligation under Article 46. If the Court agrees and finds a violation of Article 46 it will refer it back to the CoM which can then take action against the Member State - including suspension or expulsion from the Council of Europe. If the UK chooses to enact legislation which the ECtHR has explicitly found to be unlawful it is difficult to see how the CoM could resist a referral to the Grand Chamber. Indeed such a referral would arguably be necessary to ensure the integrity of the Convention system is maintained. &#xa0;9.              In political terms, as the Secretary General of the Council of Europe Thorbjorn Jagland has stressed, non-compliance with the judgment would send shock waves across Europe and around the world. In particular, Member States with particularly poor human rights records - such as Russia and Turkey - would likely privately welcome the UK’s non-compliance and use it as justification for dishonouring the Convention and respective Court judgments against them. In short, the UK could set in train a process which would see gradual diplomatic withdrawal from adherence to the post WW2 human rights framework with dangerous consequences for the continued protection of human rights in Europe and across the world. In addition, a referral to the Grand Chamber – let alone any sanction that may follow - would be deeply embarrassing and damaging to the UK’s international reputation; badly undermining UK efforts to promote respect for human rights and the Rule of Law on the world stage. Needless to say that suspension or expulsion from the Council of Europe would be catastrophic for UK interests and may also threaten the UK’s continued membership of the EU.&#xa0;10.              It is of course inevitable that Governments and Parliaments will sometimes be unhappy with court judgments which uphold individual rights and declare Government policy unlawful. However, it should be a source of pride that despite understandable political frustrations, UK Governments and Parliaments have for decades distinguished themselves from despots and dictators by respecting the Rule of Law and complying with Court rulings. As the former Lord Chancellor, Rt Hon Kenneth Clarke QC MP has commented “the Rule of Law is one of our greatest exports”. Non-compliance with the Hirst judgment would end this proud legacy. &#xa0;11.              The domestic legal implications of non-compliance would be similarly problematic. There are already around 2500 similar applications brought by disenfranchised UK prisoners before the Court. In the only other UK prisoner voting case that has been decided - Greens and MT v UK - the Court applied the pilot judgment procedure and  granted the UK time from the judgment becoming final to bring forward proposals to change the law, effectively “freezing” the remaining cases. The judgment awarded costs and expenses but – contrary to widespread media myth - held that damages were not appropriate in the case and that in future cases no financial compensation would be payable. Just satisfaction would instead be achieved by a change in the law. If the UK does not change the law, these cases will eventually be “unfrozen” meaning that costs and expenses – but not damages - will likely be payable by the UK Government. If the blanket ban remains in place it is also highly likely that further litigation will be brought by those who continue to be disenfranchised in a manner that explicitly breaches the Convention. The Government will therefore face further costs and expenses for these additional claims.&#xa0;Likely legal consequences of legislating to disqualify prisoners sentenced to more than 4 years in prison from voting; or disqualifying those sentenced to more than 6 months?&#xa0;12.              In determining the consequences of either of these reform options it is worth considering what type of policy response is required to comply with the Hirst No 2 judgment. In Hirst No2 the Strasbourg Court did not require full enfranchisement nor prescribe any hard and fast rules for compliance with the Protocol. Instead, in a thoughtful and thoroughly reasoned decision the Court ruled that the general, automatic and indiscriminate disenfranchisement of all serving prisoners, irrespective of the nature or gravity of their offences, is incompatible with Article 3 of Protocol No 1 (right to free elections) of the ECHR. &#xa0;13.              Since the 2005 judgment there have been a number of subsequent ECtHR rulings on the rights of prisoners under Protocol 1, Article 3. The most important and authoritative judgment for the purposes of providing guidance on this issue is the most recent decision by the Grand Chamber in Scoppola v Italy (No3). The case concerned the situation in Italy where under the Italian Criminal Code a life sentence entails a lifetime ban from public office which in turn forfeits the right to vote. The Grand Chamber handed down judgment in the case in May 2012 and found that a life-long ban on certain prisoners voting fell within Italy’s wide margin of appreciation to decide which criminals are allowed to vote. Because Italy allows some prisoners to vote it does not have an “automatic and indiscriminate” ban of the type the Court rejected in Hirst No 2. In its judgment, the Court confirmed that automatic and indiscriminate bans breach the Convention; that States must allow for at least some prisoners to vote, but that States have a wide discretion when deciding which prisoners should vote and how to remove an indiscriminate ban. The Court’s decision turned on the fact that the Italian ban was only applied in connection with certain offences against the State or the judicial system or with regards to offences which the courts considered to warrant a sentence of less than three years.&#xa0;14.              Specifically the Court underlined that the margin of appreciation in this area is wide and that this has been repeatedly affirmed by the Court. The Court noted that comparative law information:&#xa0;underlines the importance of the principle that each State is free to adopt legislation in the matter in accordance with historical development, cultural diversity and political thought within Europe, which it is for each contracting state to mould into their own democratic vision. &#xa0;The Court held that in particular &#xa0;the contracting states may decide either to leave it to the courts to determine the proportionality of a measure restricting convicted prisoners’ voting rights, or to incorporate provisions into their laws defining the circumstances in which such a measure should be applied. In this latter case, it will be for the legislature itself to balance the competing interests in order to avoid any general automatic and indiscriminate restriction. It will then be the role of the court to examine whether, in a given case, this result was achieved and whether the wording of the law, or the judicial decision, was in compliance with Article 3 of Protocol No 1.&#xa0;The Court therefore specifically rejects the notion that the intervention of a judge is essential for determining the proportionality of a disenfranchisement. Instead, the legislature, balancing competing interests, could determine the circumstances in which disenfranchisement can occur.  The Court even observes that “indeed, the circumstances in which the right to vote is forfeited may be detailed in law, making its application conditional on such factors as the nature or gravity of the offence committed.” However the Court rightly reiterates that it will continue to exercise its supervisory jurisdiction in determining whether, in an individual case, the Convention has been complied with.&#xa0;15.              The alternative options for reform would make disenfranchisement dependent on the length of a custodial sentence. The length of a custodial sentence handed down in an individual case is traditionally intended to reflect the gravity of the offence for which the individual has been convicted, taking into account all the circumstances. It follows therefore that linking disenfranchisement to sentence length will in principle accord with the Court’s judgment in Scoppola where the gravity of an offence was explicitly cited as a factor upon which legislation in this area could be based. The court also references the nature of an offence as being relevant to disenfranchisement decisions. Arguably a more intellectually coherent policy would link disenfranchisement to both gravity and the nature of an offence –for example offences that are considered to offend against the integrity of the electoral system such as voter fraud. &#xa0;16.              While, following Scoppola, sentence length is a legally sound factor for disenfranchisement criteria, narrowing too finely the class of prisoners who will be enfranchised – for example only those serving less than six months – arguably risks the UK falling foul of the Court’s supervisory jurisdiction. The Court will continue to be able to determine whether disenfranchisement is proportionate in individual cases. Given the severity of the disenfranchisement penalty, and the broad range of offences and cases where a sentence of more than six months may be imposed by UK courts, the UK may well risk future breaches of the Convention if the minimal six month option is chosen. The alternative option, a threshold of disenfranchisement for those receiving sentences of over four years, is more likely to avoid individual findings of disproportionality. &#xa0;

[[[Why give prisoners the vote?]]]&#xa0;The principled arguments&#xa0;17.              The UK has a long history of denying its prisoners the right to vote. The disenfranchisement of prisoners in the UK is rooted historically in the notion of ‘civic death’, dating back to the days of Edward III. It was first formalised in the Forfeiture Act of 1870 and is now contained in the Representation of the People Act 1983. Successive governments in the UK have held the view that those who have committed crimes serious enough to warrant imprisonment have lost the moral authority to vote. Liberty does not underestimate the significance of these strongly-held and ingrained views. We do, however, believe that it is time the UK appreciated the fact that the notion of ‘civic death’ implicit in this view is fast and rightly becoming an anachronism around the world. It is out of place in a state that truly values the concept of democracy and respects the basic rights of all citizens to participate in it. &#xa0;18.              Some crimes are clearly serious enough to warrant loss of liberty in the form of a custodial sentence - this is part and parcel of a functioning and civilised democratic society and has long been accommodated under internationally-recognised human rights law.  When those convicted of crime lose the right to liberty they do not, however, cease to exist as citizens as reflected in the fact that they, rightly, remain subject to the protection afforded by the laws of the country. This is widely, and rightly, recognised in other aspects of prisoners’ lives. It is, for example, unlawful to assault or torture a prisoner. Prisoners also remain bound by the obligations our laws impose, including continuing liability for taxation on earnings and savings. That prisoners are not simply a segment of society to be locked up and forgotten about is being recognised in an increasing number of countries. There has been a continual and progressive move towards granting prisoner enfranchisement around the world, leaving the UK as part of small and shrinking minority clinging fast to undemocratic 19th Century ideas.&#xa0;19.              As the UK courts have recognised on many occasions, prisoners remain human beings and citizens of this country, even behind bars.  This is a point well made by former Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams who argues that:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "If we lose sight of the notion of the prisoner as citizen, any number of things follow               from that, and indeed are following from that. The prisoner as citizen is somebody               who can ... expect that penal custody will be something that contributes to, rather               than takes away, their capacity to act as a citizen in other circumstances." &#xa0;The blanket disenfranchisement of a subsection of society is very difficult to square with British democracy, which is built on principles of inclusiveness, equality and participation. &#xa0;20.              Liberty believes that the most fundamental flaw in the current approach is that it treats voting as a privilege to be deserved, rather than a fundamental right. We are particularly concerned that about the impact of the current ban on those citizens who have made a conscious moral choice to breach the criminal law and go to prison (i.e. refusing to obey controversial laws with which they disagree). Such people accept imprisonment as an inevitable consequence of their disobedience. It is quite another thing to suggest that such a prisoner - in the political and moral minority of a country - should also be denied the prospect of influencing the majority by the exercise of his/her vote.&#xa0;The practical case&#xa0;21.              In addition to these principled arguments there are a number of important practical reasons which support wider enfranchisement. Effective rehabilitation of prisoners serves both the interests of the individuals in questions and offers tangible wider benefits to society. Liberty believes that encouraging prisoners to take an interest in life beyond the prison gates is likely to aid effective reintegration. This is a point picked up by constitutional courts operating in comparable democracies. In Canada, for example, the Supreme Court recognised that: &#xa0;“[..] disenfranchisement is more likely to become a self-fulfilling prophecy than a spur to reintegration. Depriving at-risk individuals of their sense of collective identity and membership in the community is unlikely to instill a sense of responsibility and community identity, while the right to participate in voting helps teach democratic values and social responsibility.” &#xa0;This is a view reiterated by the Catholic Bishops of England, who argued, in a recent report, that:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ‘Prison regimes should treat prisoners less as objects, done to by others, and more               as subjects who can become authors of their own reform and redemption. In that               spirit, the right to vote should be restored to sentenced prisoners.”&#xa0;22.              It is further impossible to ignore the reality that minority ethnic groups are disproportionately affected by the disenfranchisement of prisoners. According to recent reports, black men are eight times more likely to be barred from voting than their white counterparts due to their over-representation in the prison population. This situation does significant damage to the political representation of this sector of society, perpetuating the marginalisation of black and minority groups from the political process.&#xa0;23.              Allowing at least some of the prison population to vote would help to ensure that conditions in British prisons remain on the political agenda. Overcrowding and poor prison management generally are liable to undermine the implementation of procedures and programmes designed to aid rehabilitation. More serious still, instances of abuse in prisons are dehumanising and degrading for the individuals involved and deeply concerning for a society committed to respect for human dignity. Prison policy is therefore of huge social significance and enfranchising prisoners will help to ensure that these issues receive the political and public attention they deserve. In the words of former Conservative Home Secretary, Lord Hurd:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  “If prisoners had the vote then MPs would take a good deal more interest in                             conditions in prisons.”&#xa0;24.              Perhaps even more compelling than the reasons mitigating in favour of enfranchising prisoners, is the apparent lack of any coherent public policy justification for maintaining the current ban. We can expect - and our human rights framework demands - that where fundamental rights are restricted, a compelling public policy justification is provided. Justifications employed for restricting rights protections are often based on crime prevention or public protection, but these arguments are of no application here.  The loss of the right to vote is not an effective deterrent from crime. People are deterred from committing crime by the threat of loss of liberty with the concurrent loss of freedom of movement and separation from loved ones. Further, by compromising effective reintegration the blanket disenfranchisement of prisoners risks undermining rehabilitation and therefore crime prevention. In terms of the effectiveness of disenfranchisement as part of a sentence, at worst it is actively counterproductive; at best it serves no positive benefit.&#xa0;25.              It is sometimes argued that retention of the blanket ban can be justified on the ground that prisoners will disproportionately influence the vote in constituencies with a large prison population. The simple answer to this concern is to provide for prisoners to vote in their home constituencies, indeed this is the approach taken in Ireland where legislation passed in 2006 gave all prisoners the right to vote by post in the constituency where they would ordinarily live.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Conclusion]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]26.              Liberty is pleased that this Government has finally broken a damaging stalemate by bringing forward draft legislation. Whilst we are disappointed that the draft Bill leaves open the option of retaining the current ban in breach of this country’s international obligations, we hope that, at last, the hysteria and hyperbole will be replaced by a calm and reasonable consideration of the available options. We urge the Committee to keep in mind the implications of non-compliance with the judgments of an international Court, both for the UK’s reputation around the world and our commitment to the Rule of Law at home.                                                                                                                              June 2013&#xa0; (2005) 19 BHRC 546: The UK’s current law and policy was declared to be in breach of Article 3 Protocol 1 of the European Convention on Human Rights. ‘Voting rights of convicted prisoners detained within the United Kingdom- the UK Government’s response to the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights judgment in the case of Hirst v. the United Kingdom: consultation paper’. Department for Constitutional Affairs, 14 December 2006. ‘Voting rights of convicted prisoners detained within the United Kingdom: second stage consultation’.Consultation Paper CP6/09, Ministry of Justice, 8 April 2009. See Monitoring the Government’s response to court judgments finding breaches of human rights. Sixteenth report of the House of Commons and House of Lords Joint Committee on Human Rights. HC 728, 2006-07 and Monitoring the Government’s response to human rights judgments: annual report 2008. Thirty-first report of the House of Commons and House of Lords Joint Committee on Human Rights. HC 1078, 2007-08  House of Commons Library note: SN/PC/06480, Prisoners’ voting rights- in brief, p.6.  Ibid, p. 8. Greens and MT v UK [2011]. Scoppola v Italy [2012], Application no. 126/05. Attorney General, oral evidence to the Justice Select Committee, 24 October 2012.Article 3, Protocol 1 of the European Convention on Human Rights. The Prison Reform Trust: http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/ProjectsResearch/Citizenship/BarredfromVoting.House of Commons Standard note: SN/PC/06480, p. 3. August &amp; Ano v. The Electoral Commission and Others, 1999 (3) SA 1 (CC), para. 17. Sauve v Canada (Chief Electoral Officer); McCorrister v A-G of Canada and others 2002 SCC 68 para 34. See the comparative analysis in Scoppola v Italy (No. 3), Application no. 126/05, in particular paras 45-48. Prison Reform Trust, Barred from voting: the right to vote for sentenced prisoners, February 2011, p. 1.  Article 46, paragraph 1 of the European Convention on Human Rights. Speech by the Lord Chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice Rt Hon Kenneth Clarke QC MP, CityUK Future Litigation event, Clifford Chance, 14th September 2011, available at http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/about/moj/our-ministers-board/speeches/clarke-speech-future-litigation-140911.doc. Application nos 60041/08 &amp; 60054/08. See Frodl v Austria [2010]; Greens and MT v UK [2011]; Scoppola v Italy [2012]. Application no. 126/05. The Guardian, Archbishop of Canterbury backs votes for prisoners, 09.02.11. Available at: http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2011/feb/09/archbishop-canterbury-votes-for-prisoners.  Sauve v Canada (Chief Electoral Officer); McCorrister v A-G of Canada and others 2002 SCC 68, para 37.  Department for Christian Responsibility and Citizenship of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of England &amp; Wales, A Place of Redemption. Prison Reform Trust, Barred from voting: the right to vote for sentenced prisoners.  Cited in Leech &amp; Shephard (2003) Prisons Handbook 2003/4 Manchester: MLA press. Irish Penal Reform Trust, Prisoners in Ireland and Election 2011, http://www.iprt.ie/contents/1983. 