VEP 0040&#xa0;

[[[Submission by Professor Sir Francis Jacobs VEP 0040]]]

[[[Further note on EU law]]]1.              It may be helpful to add a further note on EU law, on which I was not questioned at the public hearing. My view on EU law is set out in my paper at 1.2.11. A different view is taken by Martin Howe QC in his paper.  The main question is whether the Court’s ruling can be transposed to elections to the European Parliament as a matter of EU law.  The EU Charter of Fundamental Rights does not deal with elections to national parliaments, but it does include as a fundamental right the right to vote in elections to the European Parliament.  Charter rights which correspond to Convention rights are to be interpreted in the same way as Convention rights (see Article 52(3) of the Charter).2.               Martin Howe says (at 21) that there is no correspondence here between the Convention and the Charter because their scope of application is different: Article 3 of the First Protocol applies to national elections, while Article 39 of the Charter applies to elections to the European Parliament.  However, he appears to overlook the point that elections to the European Parliament – which is part of our legislature – do fall within Article 3 of the First Protocol: see the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in Matthews v United Kingdom (1999).  So the Charter right does correspond to the Convention right.  Accordingly a blanket ban on prisoner voting in elections to the European Parliament does infringe EU law.  The European Court of Justice would be likely to rule to that effect.3.                Martin Howe has a further reason for referring to the risk that Article 3 of the First Protocol might be regarded as relevant, as a matter of interpretation, for elections to the European Parliament.  That risk, he says, “strongly reinforces the desirability of the UK withdrawing from the First Protocol, and doing so as soon as possible”.  But I do not think that he is correct on that point either. Denunciation by the United Kingdom of the First Protocol would not affect the interpretation by the European Court of Human Rights of Article 3 of the First Protocol; and denunciation would not affect the interpretation (ultimately for the European Court of Justice) of Article 39 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which is to be interpreted in line with Article 3 of the First Protocol.4.              Denunciation of the First Protocol, while it would remove the need to amend UK legislation as regards elections to the UK Parliament for the future, would not affect the obligation to comply with judgments already given before the denunciation took effect, including any awards by the Court of compensation. Denunciation would also not affect the existing obligation under EU law to amend UK legislation concerning elections to the European Parliament so as to remove the blanket ban on prisoner voting in those elections.July 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;