&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by the Peabody Trust]]]&#xa0;The changes to housing support through the Welfare Reform Act have led Peabody to take a multiple pronged response. A Welfare Reform Group was set up to discuss the implications and best practice. This led to a rolling programe of awareness raising and advice. Following on from this, the Peabody Lettings Team have worked jointly with local authorities to hold sessions where interested residents can meet for mutual exchange discussion. The Peabody employment and training team have worked with clients to improve job readiness.The Welfare Benefits team within Peabody have worked to co-ordinate these approaches. In addition, we have looked to maximize income and assist in gathering evidence to demonstrate overnight care needs where appropriate. Where none of these approaches have had immediate effect, we have applied for Discretionary Housing Payments for clients with a reasonably positive effect. What is clear is that as much information around reforms must be made public as early as possible. This has allowed Peabody to advise claimants and give claimants an opportunity to prepare and exercise choices earlier, rather than creating a bottle-neck when everyone seeks assistance at once.It would be useful to examine further ways to create work incentives. If the under occupation penalty was expressed as a % of Housing Benefit payable as opposed to the total rent there would be more of a work incentive.Like other Registered Social Landlords, Peabody has seen an increase in arrears. Residents are struggling to meet a 14% or 25% increase in the contribution of their rent if they have spare bedrooms, against a backdrop of 1% benefit increases or below inflation pay rises. Peabody does not have enough one bedroom properties for those who are under occupied to move into. Although residents are pro-actively looking for exchanges or transfers, demand hopelessly outstrips supply. Residents who cannot realistically take paid employment, or take enough hours to float off of benefits are essentially doomed to face repossession action.A further problem is that claimants themselves are identifying that they don’t feel confident that they will pay the rent directly to Peabody. Claimants admit that other creditors will be more forceful knowing they have rent money paid directly under Universal Credit. Claimants also admit that with limited money from benefit payments, the temptation to dip into rent money will be great, especially at Christmas and other peak periods of consumer demand. Whilst it is a laudable aim that claimants manage money better, it might be more suitable to aim this at the most job ready first. If the direct payment were trialed at WTC and JSA claimants first, it could be evaluated properly. &#xa0;Discretionary Housing Payments have been a life line where claimants have used the breathing space to look towards downsizing and pursue employment opportunities. Peabody has encouraged claimants receiving DHPs to make partial payments and therefore build up a further buffer zone before facing full shortfalls.However, for those claimants furthest from the employment market and in less desirable properties, a DHP is realistically only delaying the inevitable rent arrears that will come when the scheme is exhausted.Whilst the Discretionary Housing Payment is a ray of hope in a world of fear, these are only breathing space payments really. Payment is patchy, and those claimants who are most articulate (or have articulate supporting services) have an unfair advantage over those whose circumstances may be more worthy, but aren’t articulate.Families with children are most likely to be hit by the benefit cap. The implications are severe where the cap removes all Housing Benefit payment. It would have been better to have tapered the reduction in over a period of time. Claimants with debt installment plans now have to re-negotiate, credit that was affordable can be defaulted on overnight as income is cut. Whilst the principle of a benefit cap, like the wage stop under supplementary benefit before, is laudable, the way it has come through has left claimants unprepared in the main.Claimants with disabilities are more likely to be affected by the under occupation penalty. Often housed in properties with a spare bedroom, it can be difficult to prove the need of an overnight carer as DLA changes to PIP with the planned 20% cut in caseload. ESA has already proved to throw out the proverbial baby with the bathwater, with claimants with severe limitations being told they are fit to work, just as much as those with only minor limitations. The uncertainty of income has taken “security” out of social welfare. This makes it difficult where there is an under occupation penalty, a reduced amount of benefit but the extra costs of disablement not being paid.What could be helpful would be for the under occupation penalty to be waived whilst appeal to a first tier tribunal is taking place. This would provide an element of security whilst a claimant is on lower income than they believe they should be. If the appeal is lost, then the penalty re-applies. If the appeal is won, then the penalty is re-applied (or the shortfall recovered from the backdated benefit). Temporary accommodation and supported accommodation by its nature is dealing with vulnerable people at vulnerable points in life. Direct payments would not be an ideal way forward at those points in time. An exemption should be considered from the under occupation penalty and benefit cap given the nature of the housing and its often higher costs.&#xa0;Mr Danny HardieWelfare Benefits Adviser&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;To this end, the Committee is particularly interested in hearing views on -&#xa0;24 July 2013&#xa0;