ECPAT UK is a leading children’s rights charity working on the issues of child exploitation and child trafficking. It is active in campaigning and lobbying Government, producing research, training frontline professionals, and working with young victims of trafficking. ECPAT UK has a long history of campaigning against child trafficking in the UK and an on-going programme of research, training and advocacy informs our campaigning efforts. ECPAT UK has been instrumental in raising awareness in government of the plight of children trafficked into the UK for all forms of exploitation. We also work directly with child victims of trafficking, which provides insight into the experiences of these children and the processes/systems that they encounter.ECPAT UK is part of the consortium of charities known as the Anti-Trafficking Monitoring Group (ATMG), which monitors the implementation of the Council of Europe Convention against Trafficking in Human Beings and EU Directive 2011/36. ECPAT UK is also a member of the many working groups and consortiums, which include: the ACPO Working Group on Child Abuse; the Child Trafficking Information-Sharing Forum; the London Local Safeguarding Children Board Trafficking Sub-Group; the National Referral Mechanism Advisory Group; the Home Office Joint Strategic Group Children’s Sub-Group; and the Refugee Children’s Consortium. &#xa0;ECPAT UK responded to the official consultation paper Transforming Legal Aid: Delivering a more credible and efficient system in June 2013.&#xa0;

[[[Introduction]]]

[[[:]]]1. ECPAT UK is concerned that the current proposals contained in the Government’s consultation paper Transforming Legal Aid: Delivering a more credible and efficient system been put forward before the legal aid changes implemented by Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (LASPO) can be measured or effectively understood. ECPAT UK is concerned about the effects the proposed residence test would have in preventing trafficked children accessing legal aid in those areas of law where legal aid still exists currently after LASPO, such as public law, community care, special educational needs, homelessness and public and certain private law family proceedings. It is our opinion that the proposed changes would result in an unfair inequality of arms between the state and an individual subject to its power – an inequality that is all the more marked for children and young people, whose particular vulnerabilities create distinct barriers to their ability to access justice and have their voices and wishes heard.2. In addition, it is our opinion that the proposals stand to contravene the UK’s obligations under national and international legislation that serve to protect the rights of children.3. Refugee, asylum-seeking, migrant and trafficked children are often particularly vulnerable and in need of specific protection and assistance. In recognition of this, the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child’s General Comment No. 6 on Treatment of Unaccompanied and Separated Children Outside their Country of Origin (2005) states that where children are involved in administrative or judicial proceedings they should be provided with legal representation.4. The need for legal representation for children has also been emphasised by the Council of Europe. The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe guidelines on child-friendly justice state that:‘3.7 Children should have the right to their own legal counsel and representation, in their own name, in proceedings where there is, or could be, a conflict of interest between the child and the parents or other involved parties.3.8 Children should have access to free legal aid, under the same or more lenient conditions as adults.’5. Directive 2011/36 to prevent and combat trafficking in human beings and protect victims (hereafter ‘the Trafficking Directive’ makes clear provisions for child victims with regard to access to legal representation. Article 12.2 states:‘Member States shall ensure that victims of trafficking in human beings have access without delay to legal counselling, and, in accordance with the role of victims in the relevant justice system, to legal representation, including for the purpose of claiming compensation. Legal counselling and legal representation shall be free of charge where the victim does not have sufficient financial resources.’6. This Directive must be considered in the context of the Charter of the Fundamental Rights of the European Union in which Article 47 guarantees the right to an effective remedy and fair trial:‘Everyone whose rights and freedoms guaranteed by the law of the Union are violated has the right to an effective remedy before a tribunal in compliance with the conditions laid down in this Article. Everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal previously established by law. Everyone shall have the possibility of being advised, defended and represented. Legal aid shall be made available to those who lack sufficient resources in so far as such aid is necessary to ensure effective access to justice.’7. Changes to legal aid for prison law matters will mean that children and young people in custody will not get legal support to deal with many of the crucial issues they face or to challenge decisions that affect their lives and their liberty. It is likely that many foreign national children in the prison estate will be affected by the residence test proposals. ECPAT UK’s experience is that, despite Association of Chief Police Officers guidance and Crown Prosecution Service policy guidance, and the principle that victims of trafficking should be protected and not punished, many children who have been trafficked are arrested and charged, prosecuted and convicted for crimes they have been forced to commit as a direct result of their trafficking. This means that hundreds of children end up in custody and in the prison estate, and subsequently in immigration detention. These are highly vulnerable individuals who, under the proposals, will no longer have legal assistance to challenge the lawfulness of detention. In the wider context of the proposals, these individuals may also be hampered in their ability to bring criminal appeal cases against convictions for crimes committed as a direct result of trafficking (see Q5 on Judicial Review). Judicial reviews have driven prison reform in relation to children. For example, note the highly significant judicial review against the Home Secretary arguing that the Children Act 1989 applied to children in prison. In this instance, a range of child protection measures was subsequently incorporated for those children in Young Offenders Institutions. 8. The Lord Chancellor will be aware of an important judgement from the Lord Chief Justice sitting in the Court of Appeal, which included three minors who had been trafficked for cannabis cultivation (R v L &amp; Others [2013] EWCA Crim 991). The Court of Appeal agreed and found that the criminal courts should consider the extent to child the crime of which he or she was accused was consequent on and integral to the exploitation of which he or she was a victim, paying regard to the non-prosecution principle of Article 8 of the EU Directive to prevent and combat trafficking in human beings and protect victims (2011/36/EU), which came into force on 6 April 2013. Such cases highlight the shameful reality that many children in custody are victims of trafficking who require legal representation in order to access their rights under various European trafficking legislation and under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC).9. The need for legal representation of child victims of trafficking for prison law matters is likely to increase not decrease in line with the increase in the phenomenon of trafficking and exploitation itself. The number of cannabis farms identified within the UK has been increasing, from just over 3,000 in 2007 to almost 8,000 in 2011. The size and scale of these farms has been changing too. The increase in cannabis farms has been seen alongside a growing number of Vietnamese child and adult victims of trafficking. In 2011, 30 victims (two-thirds of them children) were identified through the National Referral Mechanism (NRM) as trafficked and forced to work in a cannabis factory. 27 of these were Vietnamese. 2012 saw a 45% increase in the total number of Vietnamese nationals referred into the NRM. Perhaps most tellingly, in 2012, Vietnam was the top country of origin for trafficked minors; the number identified (93) through the NRM being a 63% increase from the previous year.10. In our work, ECPAT UK frequently comes across trafficking for cannabis cultivation cases or incidences where a young person has been trafficked for forced criminality, such as forced theft/begging/shoplifting. 11. In 2011/12 only 1.12% of all legal aid spending was spent on prison law, but the current proposals will dramatically affect the assistance available to all children, including those who have been trafficked and exploited, denying them access to justice.12. ECPAT UK disagrees with the proposed approach for limiting legal aid, which means children would have to prove to their lawyers that they were living in the United Kingdom lawfully and had been for at least 12 months continuously. Child victims of trafficking are unlikely to be able to establish that they meet this test despite being recognised as a particularly vulnerable category of persons. A factual and legal investigation into whether a child can satisfy the lawful residence would need to be carried out and established prior to any work on the substantive case being commenced. It is likely to mean that many individuals will be denied help from the outset as lawful residence will be the gateway through which these children will not be able to pass. It is our belief that the residence test would undermine the rule of law for children (and adults) who may have strong cases against public authorities but are unable to pursue them effectively. It would also be unworkable on a practical level and would act as a barrier for children accessing justice.13. The residence test is inconsistent with Articles 3 and 12 of the UNCRC, which is frequently used to interpret children’s human rights in domestic case law. Such a test would not allow children to effectively participate in critical decisions affecting them and their futures, which would directly contravene Article 12. The test would not pay regard to Article 3, which states that the best interests of a child should be a primary consideration. A proposal that curtails a child’s access to legal representation and justice to challenge failures against them is clearly not in a child’s best interests.14. The proposals state that in order to be eligible for legal aid, the applicant would have to be ‘lawfully resident’ in the UK and at the time of applying the applicant would have to have been residing lawfully in the UK for at least 12 months continuously at some point in their life. Child victims of trafficking will invariably not be lawfully present in the UK as they have been trafficked against their will for the purposes of exploitation in the UK.  15. Child victims of trafficking require legal aid to challenge public authorities acting unlawfully, such as if a local authority does not comply with its duties to the child, such as placing the child in unsuitable accommodation from which they might be retrafficked, even within the UK. This is of particular relevance to trafficked children who are highly vulnerable even after coming into contact with the local authority or other agencies. It has been estimated that 60% of child victims of trafficking go missing from local authority care, and many of these face retrafficking and exploitation. ECPAT UK has identified that there are no commonly agreed safety and protection standards across the UK for the placement of children who are suspected or known to be trafficked. This inconsistency has allowed safeguarding issues to be side-lined and, in some instances, cast aside, leading to further harm to the child. Thus, the importance of accessing legal representation in order to secure safe and appropriate accommodation cannot be underestimated in light of the often-inadequate response of local authorities to respond to child victims.16. ECPAT UK is particularly concerned about the effect this test would have on thousands of child victims of trafficking who are EEA nationals. In 2011, the UK Human Trafficking Centre identified 489 potential child victims of trafficking from 43 countries. Romanian children represented 20% of all child victims in the UK, with 9% from Slovakia and 2% from Bulgaria. For those EEA national children who are in the UK for a period of 12 continuous months are likely to be unable to provide evidence of this if they are victims of trafficking. It is a totally unworkable and unreasonable proposal to expect any child, particularly those who have been trafficked and exploited, to provide evidence of their lawful presence in this country. In any case and, as mentioned above, it will require collating evidence and, in EEA cases, will involve the individual child (or adult) showing that he or she satisfies the legal test for ‘lawful residence’ under EU law. This is a task that individuals require lawyers for. Such a burden should not be unfairly placed on those who are vulnerable and particularly those who had no choice whatsoever in their being present ‘unlawfully’ in the UK as a direct result of their trafficking experience. As such, the proposals will render thousands of EEA national child victims of trafficking unable to access legal representation that they so urgently require as identified victims under the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (hereafter ‘the Trafficking Convention’) and the Trafficking Directive. This would indirectly discriminate against EEA national children who will be disproportionately more likely to be affected than British nationals, which may contravene Community Treaty obligations.17. The current proposals offer an exception to the residence test for asylum seekers. However, if an asylum-seeking child is granted refugee status, they would then have to wait another 12 months following the grant of refugee status before becoming eligible again. The proposals would exclude those who are failed asylum seekers. Some child victims of trafficking claim asylum in the UK but it is acknowledged that trafficking is not a ‘pure’ fit into the Refugee Convention 1951, which can make such cases very complex and requiring of quality immigration lawyers. It is conceivable that those individuals who were trafficked as children, who fail to obtain asylum, will be unable to access legal aid and legal representation. This would affect children that find themselves in, unfortunately, common situations regarding lack of support turning 18. For instance, take the example of an unaccompanied asylum-seeking trafficked child who aged 17 successfully obtains refugee status while in the care of a local authority under Section 20 of the Children Act 1989. When the young person turns 18, the local authority unlawfully seeks to terminate their accommodation and support, instead of treating them as a care leaver. The young person would have to wait for 12 months after the date they were granted refugee status in order to access legal aid to challenge the local authority, even if they were made homeless in the meantime. It appears that the current proposals place a disadvantage against refugees in comparison with British nationals in the equivalent position, in contravention of Article 16 of the Refugee Convention 1951.18. Those child victims who do not claim asylum will not be able to get legal aid whatsoever (unless they are able to prove they have been lawfully resident for 12 months, which will be extremely unlikely in most instances of child trafficking). 19. Any potential victim of trafficking who is in immigration detention who is in the UK unlawfully (as most trafficked children are) and who are age-disputed would not be eligible for legal aid for their detention case, even if they are being detained unlawfully. Such proposals would severely restrict the child’s access to legal representation as a child victim of trafficking under the Trafficking Directive.20. Most child victims of trafficking are aged 16-17. Traffickers commonly seize a child’s identification documents or traffic the child on false or forged documents. Therefore, many children’s ages are disputed by the local authority, police or Home Office. In ECPAT UK’s experience, these children are often treated as adults because they are in possession of false documents appearing to make them an adult. For some, claiming asylum will not be the appropriate course for their immigration case. For others, the age dispute may only arise once they no longer fall within the asylum-seeker exception, either because they have been granted refugee status and then have to wait for 12 months, or because they have been refused and have become a failed asylum-seeker (the process of assessing age within a local authority can take many months). ECPAT UK and its partners work with many children whose ages are unlawfully assessed and is extremely concerned that the proposals risk taking away the only effective remedy from those who do not meet the requirements of the residence test. This could contravene Article 8 of the UNCRC, which determines a child’s right to an identity, of which age is a significant factor, particularly when ongoing support and protection may depend on such a decision. 21. As ECPAT UK has identified above, determining lawful residence will be extremely complex and challenging for lawyers, nevermind many individuals - and even more so for unaccompanied children and child victims of trafficking. The nature of the abuse suffered by victims of trafficking, along with mental health and disclosure issues, and language problems are likely to render it even more difficult for child victims of trafficking to be able to establish that they meet the test. It is ECPAT UK’s opinion that the residence test would be unworkable and potentially dangerous in practice. Legal aid lawyers in the areas of law in question – such as community care, special education needs, negligence, family law – may not be able to accurately ascertain if someone is ‘lawfully present’. This is often a far from straightforward issue and would be very difficult to prove. In many cases, the Home Office holds an individual’s passport and there is no immigration-checking service currently available to lawyers. Such challenges and potential misunderstandings could lead to foreign national children being discriminated against and an additional barrier to justice created. The human cost will be borne by the children. Denied access to legal representation and the possibility of being able to place trust and confidence in a legal adviser and/or adults who will help to keep them safe, risks children facing further exploitation in the UK and ending up in the hands of traffickers once more. It also increases the risk of increased detention or removal to a country of origin where again there are significant risks of destitution and retrafficking. 22. There is also confusion about those children who are under 12 months old so cannot have been lawfully present in the UK for a continuous period. Such babies would be unable to get any civil legal aid. This is clearly discriminatory against all children under the age of one. 23.  ECPAT UK is genuinely concerned that the pressure the residence test would put upon children could be damaging and severely restrict their ability to seek redress or justice when they are being treated unlawfully by public bodies. Currently, where this occurs, organisations such as ourselves step in to pressure local authorities and we frequently support lawyers in their legal challenges to local authorities, police, the Home Office and others in order to secure appropriate justice for each child. We do not know where we would be able to turn if we are not able to refer children to lawyers to seek redress where they were being failed. We consider that the proposals are reckless to the risks that these children will face without specialist legal advice. We fear that this would place huge extra burdens on the charitable sector, who would ultimately be left to support vulnerable, often exploited, children who had nowhere to turn. In the current times of austerity, to place such added financial and resource-intensive expectations on NGOs is immoral and will leave children exposed to unnecessary risk. This will ultimately not be cost-effective and will, in some cases, place added strain on local authorities because of the ‘leakage’ to other areas, such as the prison service. While the cost savings of restricting legal aid via a residence test are wholly unknown to the government, as stated in Impact Assessment MoJ194, the impact on children and those voluntary and statutory sector organisations supporting them (including local authorities) will be hugely significant. &#xa0;24. Judicial review is an essential safeguard against public authorities acting unlawfully and the primary means of challenging Government action. Some applications for judicial review are urgent and a case may need to be brought within hours/days with constantly evolving circumstances, for example, where a child victim of trafficking is denied appropriate and secure accommodation, despite the significant risk of being retrafficked, often within days, if not hours. In complex cases, such as trafficking, the full picture is not immediately apparent and ECPAT UK fears lawyers may shy away from these cases, despite their urgency, because the financial risk is too high and because it may be difficult to prove a suspected child victim of trafficking has been lawfully resident (if they haven’t claimed asylum). 25. ECPAT UK is concerned that the proposals will lead to a chilling effect discouraging lawyers from taking on such complex cases altogether, despite their importance, given the financial risks involved in taking on work without being paid unless permission is granted further along the line. This would see firms that are well regarded and have developed specialism in areas closing down and reducing the availability of suitable and skilled lawyers to take on complex cases, such as those involving age assessments and trafficking. This would have a knock-on effect of a reduction in pro bono advice, on which many vulnerable clients depend. 26. The vast majority of judicial review cases settle before the permission stage, which indicates the strength of a challenge and makes the threat of a legal challenge a vital tool in ensuring the safeguarding of children and holding public authorities to account. Children often do not understand their own situations and rely on lawyers to explain it and act upon concerns. To remove such a tool would put children at risk and hinder their access to their rights under the UNCRC and Trafficking Directive.27. Judicial reviews have been proven to be vital in determining significant changes in the law regarding children: note ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department, R (SO) v London Borough of Barking and Dagenham, and the recent trafficking cases at the Court of Appeal – R v L, R v HVN and R v THN, which concerned Vietnamese child victims of trafficking who successfully appealed their convictions as they were recognised to have committed the acts as a direct result of being trafficked. The ability of these children to have their rights heard and adhered to is not a luxury but a necessity in a fair and free society. 28. The duties, decisions and functions of the Home Office are subject to

[[[ ]]]Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The only route to challenge failures here is via judicial review. This legislation has only been in force since 2009 so case law is constantly evolving. The UK and children subject to immigration control need this route to develop rights-based practice in the Home Office, else we deny children the right to progress the law and uphold their rights. 29. Take Child X who was trafficked to the UK as a child for cannabis cultivation. He was detained by the police and the Crown Prosecution Service decided to prosecute for cannabis cultivation. Child X was imprisoned in an adult prison as his age was also disputed. Prison guards contact the local authority as they have concerns the young person is a child, but the local authority refuses to do an age assessment because the child’s visa, which is known to be forged, shows ‘proof of age’. Eventually, Child X is released but not accommodated by the local authority and left destitute. His age is eventually accepted but the local authority fails to provide appropriate support given that the individual is a victim of trafficking and has mental health issues. The Home Office then attempts to remove the young person because it has records of the child being present in a third country, and it refuses to accept the age assessment of the local authority so seeks to detain the young person under immigration powers. This is a real story of a real child in the UK. In this case, lawyers were able to assist the child to eventually challenge the authorities at each step of the way for failing to deliver what they are supposed to. The threat of a judicial review in this case was enough to make the local authority do an age assessment and to challenge the failure to provide protection and support. Without this crucial option, Child X would have faced more and extended risk and trauma without the ability to seek redress against the public authorities that are supposed to protect him and the hundreds of others like him.30. One of ECPAT UK’s main concerns with regard to the proposals on judicial review is the impact on those children going through the National Referral Mechanism (NRM). Under the NRM, there is no right of appeal for children or adults on decisions made by the Competent Authorities. This means that the only way to challenge such decisions is via a judicial review. There is only a 31% rate for children in the NRM obtaining Conclusive Grounds decisions, which is in itself worryingly low. In addition, there have been claims that discrimination exists within the decision-making process of the NRM. Figures from 1 April 2009 to 30 June 2011 reveal that 88% of British children obtained a Conclusive Grounds decision, compared with 68% of children from Romania, 32% from Nigeria, 24% from Vietnam and 17% from China.  Concerns about inconsistent and poor decision-making in the NRM, particularly by the UK Border Agency/Home Office, have been raised repeatedly and currently the only way to challenge a bad decision is via judicial review. Yet under the current proposals, there will be absolutely no way to appeal an NRM decision for many the many children that will not fit the asylum-seeker exception. This is clearly not compatible with the Trafficking Directive, which sets out the entitlement to support and protection via the identification of child victims and could be unlawful. 31. ECPAT UK knows that children’s cases often involve a significant wider public interest. It is important that cases involving significant novel points of law in relation to children receive legal aid funding to test and develop the law in relation to children. It is vital for the upholding of children’s rights and the UK’s obligations to children and providers are able to take on difficult and complex challenges involving novel points of law. 32. Trafficked children also stand to be negatively affected by cuts to legal aid for criminal cases. At the moment a suspect at the police station or someone in court on criminal charges has a choice of legal aid solicitor, so there is an incentive for firms to provide a high quality service as they can always choose to go elsewhere. The proposals would mean contracts for the provision of criminal defence services would instead be awarded to the firm, or organisation, bidding to provide it for the lowest price. &#xa0;33. The disincentive to provide a quality service that would result from the proposed changes would be especially detrimental to those who need specialist attention, like young people trafficked into the country. Guidance issued to the Crown Prosecution Service suggests child victims of trafficking should not be prosecuted for committing crimes that they were forced into as a result of their status, but there will inevitably be times where this guidance, or the child’s status, is missed by the law enforcement agency. In many cases the responsibility will fall to the criminal solicitor to identify the status of their client as a trafficked child and put forward legal arguments for the prosecution to be dropped. With the proposed changes meaning that only the bare minimum of work will be done on each case, there is a huge risk that it will be impossible to meet these responsibilities, as too little time will be spent with the client discussing background information for the child’s status to be identified. The lack of choice will mean that a child who has been poorly represented will no longer be able to change solicitors to a firm more willing to fight for their interests. Miscarriages of justice will inevitably result. &#xa0;24 July 2013ECPAT UK - Company Limited by Guarantee: 5061385, Charity number: 1104948www.ecpat.org.uk&#xa0; CRC/GC/2005/6 1 September 2005, para 36  Guidelines of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on child friendly justice, (adopted by the Committee of Ministers on the 17 November 2010 at the 1098th Meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies). Available at https://wcd.coe.int/wcd/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1705197&amp;Site=CM  http://www.ceop.police.uk/Documents/ceopdocs/externaldocs/160810_ACPO_lead's_position_on_CYP_recovered_from_cannabis_farms_FINAL.pdf http://www.cps.gov.uk/publications/docs/policy_for_prosecuting_cases_of_human_trafficking.pdf http://www.justice.gov.uk/youth-justice/accommodation/legislation-and-responsibilities/children-act-1989 The first report of the inter-departmental ministerial group (IDMG) on human trafficking in the UK (2012) http://www.soca.gov.uk/about-soca/about-the-ukhtc/national-referral-mechanism/statistics 17 years or under at the time first claimed exploitation http://www.ecpat.org.uk/sites/default/files/missing_out_2007.pdf http://www.ecpat.org.uk/sites/default/files/on_the_safe_side.pdf UKHTC: A Baseline Assessment on the nature and scale of human trafficking in 2011 (2012) http://www.ecpat.org.uk/sites/default/files/atmg_briefing_discrimination_in_the_identification_process.pdf