

[[[ ]]]&#xa0;In relation to the Call for Written Evidence in respect of the draft Deregulation Bill we wanted to draw your attention to comments we had in relation to proposals concerning out-of-court administration appointments. We had no comments on the more wide ranging questions asked in the Call for Written Evidence. In this regard please see below a copy of our email to the Insolvency Service concerning the proposal to amend paragraph 26 of Schedule B1 to the Insolvency Act 1986.“Dear Chris and NickWe are writing in connection with the proposal in the draft Deregulation Bill to amend paragraph 26 of Schedule B1 to the Insolvency Act 1986 to address problems arising out of the line cases on defective out-of-court administration appointments, starting with Minmar (929) Ltd v Khalatschi [2011] EWHC 1159. As this is really your territory, we are sending this email to you but we will also submit a copy of this email via the online system for responses given in the Call for Evidence regarding the draft Bill.Paragraph 26(2), once amended, would read: “A person who gives notice of intention to appoint under sub-paragraph (1) shall also give such notice as may be prescribed to such other persons as may be prescribed.”  The effect is that it would only be necessary to give notice to the persons listed in rule 2.20 of the Insolvency Rules 1986 where notice of intention to appoint is given under paragraph 26(1) i.e. to a person with the ability to appoint an administrative receiver or a qualifying floating charge holder (QFCH) with the ability to appoint an administrator.We welcome this change as we consider that it would resolve one of the key issues and avoid some of the unnecessary delays and uncertainties that have otherwise arisen.  We are concerned, however, that there is still scope for uncertainty (and potentially invalid appointments) where notice is still to be given to persons listed in rule 2.20 (i.e. where notice has been given to a QFCH).  Our concerns relate to the purpose of the notice, whether a notice period and/or consent is required and the effect if notice is not given/properly complied with.Rule 2.20(2) only requires a copy of the notice of intention to appoint to be given and there is nothing in rule 2.20 to suggest that the prescribed persons need to consent to the appointment.  Indeed, paragraph 28 states that an appointment under paragraph 22 may not be made unless the persons (eg a QFCH) to whom notice has been given under paragraph 26(1) have consented; but there is no mention of the prescribed persons having to consent.  Further, there is no reason why the consent of the prescribed persons should be a pre-requisite to an appointment as they have no power to intervene in the appointment process (unlike a QFCH).  However, it has become common practice, in light of the various conflicting cases, to obtain the consent of the prescribed persons, particularly where the QFCH has consented and the appointment can otherwise proceed immediately.  Unhelpfully, though, the practice in this regard is variable, precisely because there is no guidance on how or if this is required.  The alternative, as suggested in the Msaada case, is to wait five business days.  The proposed amendment to paragraph 26 would not help clarify the above.Given the history of cases on this matter and the potential for conflicting decisions, it would in our view be best to clarify what is required. This would put to an end the time and costs being incurred unnecessarily (i.e. of ensuring that the prescribed persons consent to appointments) just to avoid the risk of a potentially invalid appointment and so would, in our view, be consistent with the aims and policy of the Deregulation Bill.   We would endorse the suggestion in the FMLC’s paper on the Appointment of Administrators by Companies and Directors (Issue 173) and in particular paragraph 5.4 of that paper that a new 2.20(4) is added as follows:“Any copy notice given under this Rules – (a)              Is given for information purposes only (and without any requirement that the recipient consent to the relevant appointment); and (b)              Is not subject to any requirement for a minimum period of notice to be given.”If it was clear that the notice was a copy for information purposes only etc, any failure to comply with this requirement would not go to the root of the appointment and should not therefore risk, under paragraph 28, affecting its validity.   We welcome your thoughts on this matter.8 August 2013

[[[ ]]]&#xa0;2&#xa0;&#xa0;