&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Sarah Goddard (WSC008)]]]This is evidence submitted based on my personal experience of pursuing an academic career in medicine.I did an MRC sponsored intercalated BSc during my medical degree (1993) and I had an MRC sponsored PhD (2002), which I did at a fairly early stage in my training.  I wanted to continue with a career in academic hepatology, and got a lecturers post in gastroenterology.  In the end I gave it up and went into an NHS clinical training programme in clinical immunology.  I am now a part time consultant clinical immunologist and mother of 3.The reasons that I changed from an academic medical career were:To become an academic in liver medicine I was required to fully train in gastroenterology (including to maintain the same level of expertise in endoscopy skills as a full time gastroenterology trainee) and general medicine, which takes 5 years, and then to specialise in hepatology required a further year.  This is a demanding training programme including on calls at weekends and nights, but I was expected to maintain in addition a research programme, with supervision of a small research team and produce papers.  There are very few people who can do this on their own and in addition to being a successful mother I would argue it is almost impossible. It would have taken many years including maternity leave and part-time working.   I could have given up medicine and changed to a purely scientific career, but it is hard to give up a guaranteed job and an interesting one, for an uncertain future in academia.The only review or formal assessments that I had after my PhD when I went into the gastroenterology training programme, were RITA assessments run by general gastroenterologists.  They clearly thought that I was choosing an almost impossible path, they had no interest in my academic course, but only in the numbers of endoscopies I had done, and the other boxes I was required to tick for becoming a gastro’ consultant.  I am not sure if there is a better process for giving a more balanced approach to assessment, but this would be the single most useful and achievable thing that would have helped me.  One of my consultants suggested that I should find a rich husband, which might have helped, but I fell for an architect and they earn less than one might expect!I really enjoyed my PhD and considered giving up medicine to do medical research full time.  However, this pathway is very competitive and there is no system to provide encouragement other than the support received by other mainly male supervisors, I cannot think of one woman in medical research who I knew well enough to talk to.  The recent changes in university careers and emphasis on proving on-going publication success all adds to a competitive dog-eat-dog environment rather than a nurturing one.  To persist in an academic career one needs a lot of self-belief.When I changed to clinical immunology I found that my research was suddenly valued and not seen as a problem.  It is a niche specialty with a high percentage of academics, my annual assessments were undertaken by clinicians who had done a PhD.  I started a family in 2006 and a part time career in my current specialty works well.  I have been able to continue doing research, although not within an academic department.I sometimes feel that a lot of time and money was spent on giving me a start with my academic career, which has not been continued.  However the work that I did with MRC funding was published even as an undergraduate and contributed to the department I was based with.  In addition I continue to use my research skills in my current career, by doing small projects with support from local university departments eg genetics, by making better use of conference and journal information to treat my patients effectively, by teaching and taking part in college examination question setting.August 2013&#xa0;