&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[ Dave Pearson, ]]]

[[[Star Refrigeration (HOT02)]]]Our business has designed, manufactured and has delivered over 30MW of district heating and heatpumps in Europe. All of this avoid using HFCs as the working fluid.The largest scheme is 14MW in Drammen in Norway. www.neatpumps.comPersonally I have contributed to several studies in London on district heatpumps. I believe we can deliver significant savings in carbon with this technique but we MUST stop viable projects being commandeered by carbon reduction solutions and thereby excluding zero carbon solutions like heatpumps.&#xa0;• Is the government taking the right approach to reduce heat energy demand?I haven’t spent a great deal of time thinking about this aspect of the challenge but I do see and hear the first objective being “consumption minimisation” and do see “initiatives” to achieve this and “conditions” on various support mechanisms to ensure that support  is only provided for a reasonable amount of heat. The carbon reduction commitment is on the agenda of our clients but in reality they are probably in a state of shock and not yet fully woken up to taking significant and decisive action.• What progress is the government making on reducing the demand for heat?I really don’t know, which perhaps in its self suggests that at both a domestic and industrial level there is a lack of insight into energy consumption in either a kW sense of monetary sense. There are simple to deploy techniques to monitor and display energy consumption that can be deployed for less than £500 per site. Apathy and ignorance and therefore bigger barriers than cost.Maybe though, business &amp; society needs a government agency to knock on their doors and deploy a front of house tablet to display the meter readings. £10M would reach 20,000 businesses. The cost could be recouped over a few years.Every business should have a display in a central area of energy usage last 12 months vs previous 12 months.&#xa0;• Biomass is deemed a key fuel for heat production from both the cost and GHG perspectives. What should be done to ensure methods of calculating biomass GHG balance represent an accurate picture?I fundamentally disagree with this statement. It is a myth perpetuated by those in the business of biomass boilers, fuel sales or transport based on a lack of rigorous investigation of the following factors:Likely world fuel cost rises for biomass – the cost risks render this a bad idea.Impact of imported biomass on our macro-economic position. Energy independence has to be a guide on any technique stated as “key”. We should be reducing our energy imports not switching fuels.Impact of increased imports of equipment on economy vs locally manufactured solutions or existing systems.Effect of increased local emissions (biomass is NOT cleaner a burn than gas). We have a national situation with air quality attributed to a life shortening of 7 months. Whilst this is likely in the main due to transportation does it make sense support a combustion technique dirtier than that it displaces or requiring additional road / sea freight?True carbon footprint of harvest and transport operations for local and imported biomass.Where I can accept biomass is on a rural community level however if I owned a forest I would be selling the fuel to the benefit of the local economy not puffing it up the smokestack. This is the fundamental difference to the Norwegian approach to fossil fuel vs the UK one.Therefore based on the above facts, biomass should not be viewed as a key fuel.• There are sustainability guidelines for biomass, do these go far enough?Absolutely not. They are neither inquisitive enough nor robust enough against misreporting.• What will the local environmental impact (for example air pollution) be from the use heat generation in urban areas, for example CHP units?CHP engines are also less clean than burning gas. Highly dependent on good quality maintenance and quality of fuel being consumed, and on operating set up where efficiency and cleanliness are mutually incompatible. A key aspect on the suitability of CHP is the utilisation of heat. In our experience, CHP engines are too quickly specified for demand that is too high. This is also incompatible with the “primary directive” of reduced consumption. A major oversight in many CHP assessments that also leads to excessive pollution is that the heat demand is done in advance of any heat capture and re-use. Many facilities by virtue of the operation dynamics do require heating and cooling simultaneously. By using heatpumps to capture waste heat and deliver for consumption the demand falls again. Sadly however as heat capture and re-use is not considered in advance of CHP specification the CHP heat demand is over stated resulting in either sub economic operation of the CHP unit, or sub-economic IN-operation of the CHP unit. A well designed building should have no fuel combustion during late spring, autumn and summer as any air conditioning is a viable source for heating to 65C or thereabouts.• What are the relative merits of using gas to directly provide space heating compared to centralised electricity production plus domestic heat pumps? This is a very closed question implying these are the only two options. However taking these two options, gas for space heating results in a thermal conversion of around 85% less distribution losses in the gas network. The network exists and is simple to extend. Similarly, local domestic heatpumps can be added and depending on the quality of the installation can decentralize heat. Other ideas though that need to be borne in mind are the emergence of domestic CHP and domestic fuel cells. I personally expect a “gas to electricity and heat” format to prevail in a domestic setting as whilst I am a heatpump supporter, unless the target is zero carbon heat then the use of domestic heatpumps seems challenging. Not least of all as I’m quite worried about the widespread dispersion of HFC heatpumps which invariable reach a point of gas leakage of the very high Global Warming gases they use. Larger heatpumps use zero GWP fluids.On a more networked scale district heating sourced with the low grade heat from the power plant (they are rarely more than 50% efficient so 1Gwe = 1GWth at circa 30C) is a viable source that can be delivered in a district network.&#xa0;• Why is community heating/CHP not more common in the UK?Short-termism of all involved and lack of “big government” saying “just do it”.Digging in a bit deeper, it is the digging in i.e. the establishment of networks.We need a mandatory “network ready” approach for all new building and construction zones which simply means hook up points and an operation temperature of &lt;80C. Think how much easier it would be to roll out micro networks if the buildings were ready?We need mandatory network provision on all soft digs. i.e. new estates and office developments, hospitals. 75% of the cost of heat networks is the digging and backfill so doing it when construction is underway. Whether subsidized or mandatory doesn’t matter. We need to stop allowing projects with no forward looking infrastructure.Beyond the “just do it?” mentality of Scandinavia which is probably the answer to “why aren’t networks Everywhere” more subtle factors like “anchor tenants” and collaboration between a couple of buildings comes into play. I am also skeptical about the ambition of the utility companies to deploy distict heatpumps which use 25% of the fuel of other techniques.Maybe a different approach is needed with the provision of an “ambient network”. Basically a pipe that users can buy heat from or sell heat to. It is uninsulated and probably single loop at 10C to 20C. Individual buildings could deploy reversible heatpump units and thereby also remove the need for roof top mounted services and gas networks.• What are the lock-in, costs and GHG savings from the promotion of different forms of domestic heating solution? I don’t know what this means. Only heatpumps can be zero carbon.• Should the government take any further any specific actions in relation to cooling? District cooling might seem more prevalent in warmer countries but by successfully deploying “ambient thermal loops” cooling can be part of the heat equation. Without a doubt, burning fuel to heat stuff and burning electricity to cool it back down in an industrial context is poor.&#xa0;• Why does the RHI not seem to promote heat pumps successfully? Heatpumps are the most complex of all the non-domestic solutions. Not only do they need the deployment of distribution networks (district heating) they require the acquisition networks as well whereas biomass or gas just need the existing roads, a port or gas pipe. Most of the clients I have spoken to are in a mixture of ignorance or delusion that gas fired CHP is as wonderful as the sales guys say it is. Biomass is even more skewed with it being viewed as the best deal in town.A lack of understanding and a lack of promotion. Star Refrigeration have deployed the world’s largest district heatpump using a natural working fluid and yet it doesn’t feature in the headline addresses or 10 o’ clock news. All we hear about is electricity generation, or maybe biomass. Even if we do hear heatpumps we hear of domestic ones and the challenges they face.RHI would have supported heatpumps better if biomass was appropriately subsidized based on real carbon footprint and imported fuel content.Whilst I fully understand the limitations that DECC face in the classification of renewable sources, they must rectify the situation where a distillery waste heat at 50C is less valuable than a river at 5C.Maybe the energy efficiency directive will allow the incentivisation of reclaimed heat.

[[[Take a hospital as an example. It requires heating and cooling ]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[12 months of the year. The waste heat from the cooling can be boosted up to 60C]]]

[[[ for ]]]

[[[space or sanitary heating 12 months of the year dropping the summer time heat base]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[load to zero. ]]]

[[[Instead we see CHP engines deployed that depend on this 4-5 month summer usage to be viable- effectively killing the opportunity to harvest heat and consigning the facility to being a gas consumer forever.]]]

[[[A hospital could be zero carbon heating and coolin]]]

[[[g using heatpumps and renewable electricity. ]]]The scheme above would not be RHI so it is not attractive versus biomass or CHP.Personally I would legislate against CHP unless it is for steam production or uses biogas.• How successful will the RHI be when rolled out to households?Probably quite successful as there is an army of PV guys who have the patter and the contacts list to deliver. Quality is the challenge and I worry about a legacy of leaking systems.• Thermal storage is a potential useful method of balancing electricity/energy demand both diurnally and annually. What is government policy doing to promote thermal storage, and should it do more/different? I’m not aware of any support. I don’t really understand it but thermal storage requires a differential to charge the unit and this is quite a penalty. I have seen evidence of seasonal storage in Scandinavia and this strikes me as a good idea, but it is far from necessary in this somewhat benign climate. It rarely drops so cold that heat can’t be harvested from rivers or treated effluent plants and certainly not from data centers. The only reason for seasonal storage is efficiency and it wouldn’t make that much difference.One application is the allowance of ground storage being RHI eligible. This is good.August 2013&#xa0;