&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Basf Plc (CCS01)]]]The Committee invites responses addressing some or all of the following questions:BASF intends to respond to those listed in red given our expertise and interests. BASF is the world’s leading chemical company: The Chemical Company. Our portfolio ranges from chemicals, plastics, performance products and crop protection products to oil and gas. We combine economic success with environmental protection and social responsibility. Through science and innovation, we enable our customers in nearly every industry to meet the current and future needs of society. Our products and solutions contribute to conserving resources, ensuring nutrition and improving quality of life. We have summed up this contribution in our corporate purpose: We create chemistry for a sustainable future. BASF had sales of €72.1 billion in 2012 and more than 110,000 employees as of the end of the year. BASF has been at the forefront of innovation in gas treatment for over 40 years. In 1971, the company for the first time applied newly developed technology based on activated methyldiethanolamine to remove carbon dioxide (CO2) from synthesis gas to produce ammonia, a crucial starting material for fertilizer. The facility, which is still in operation, is located at the Ludwigshafen, Germany. Today, almost 300 plants worldwide employ BASF’s knowhow to remove acid gases such as CO2 and hydrogen sulphide (H2S) from various types of process gases. Recently, the company started marketing its combined gas treating technology, chemical and technical service offerings under the new Oase® brand. With climate change becoming an increasing concern globally, the team is actively leveraging its expertise to become a leading contender in the race to make carbon capture and storage (CCS) commercially viable. More information about BASF’s gas treatment solutions can be found here:http://www.intermediates.basf.com/chemicals/web/gas-treatment/en/BASF UK generated €3.6bn revenue in 2012 of which €1.9bn was oil, gas, and metals trading. The remaining €1.7bn accounts for 3% of BASF global chemical sales (€62bn), Our UK market share is around 3% of the £57bn UK Chemicals sector. The bulk of our UK sales are chemicals and performance products (e.g. pigments, water treatments and care chemicals). We are major providers of product to supply chains for oil and gas, agriculture, automotive, construction, and pharmaceuticals, as well as to other chemical manufacturers. We are major sponsor of innovation in the UK with over 100 R&amp;D partnerships in 2011. Within BASF this was the highest number outside Germany. These range from university projects with partners such as Imperial College, to institutional projects and commercial partnerships with BP and Shell.If we were a UK-led business we would be one of the top 100 companies in the UK. Several of our sites have over 80% of their product exported. We are one of @70 companies engaging with the Government’s Strategic Relationship Management ProgrammeBASF are providers of chemistry solutions for carbon capture, we are not major providers of storage solutions, but work in partnership with those that are, to deliver CCS pilots and trials. 

[[[Niederaussem]]]

[[[ – solvents for scrubbing ]]]BASF is a partner in a pilot project steered by RWE Power at the Coal Innovation Centre in Niederaussem, Germany, near Cologne. The object is to test highly energy-efficient and oxygen-stable solvents for removing carbon dioxide from bituminous coal emissions. BASF has developed an improved scrubbing process, based on innovative solvents, to capture CO2. We have demonstrated that energy input can be slashed by about 20%.The pilot plant was built and engineered by Munich-based international gases group Linde. It captures around eight tonnes per day of CO2, equivalent to a separation efficiency of 90% for the flue gas processed. The technology should allow more than 90% of the process gas from a power plant to be captured for sequestration underground. Both BASF and Linde are now working on solutions for demonstration plants – the first are due on stream in 2015 – as well as large-scale power plants. CO2 capture is expected to be used commercially in coal-fired power stations in 2020. 

[[[Puertollano – IGCC output purification]]]In Spain a special BASF gas treatment technology - similar to the purification of syngas - is being used at the IGCC (Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle) power plant of ELCOGAS in Puertollano. It will capture about 35,000 tons of gas annually. The plant, already in commercial-scale operation, is also being used for demonstration purposes. It is expected to provide a wealth of information relating to the viability of the IGCC concept, which differs from the post-combustion capture concept. 

[[[North Carolina – seco]]]

[[[nd generation ‘water-free’ capture technology]]]In the US BASF has joined forces with RTI International – an institute based in Research Triangle Park, North Carolina – to develop second-generation capture technology. We are looking into novel non-aqueous solvent systems that can be recycled. The aim is to find a “water free” capture process that could use 40% less energy than conventional amine-based processes.We hope to clear a path for rapid commercialisation of the carbon capture technology and thus enable cost-competitive clean energy production from coal-fired power plants.

[[[Nagaoka City – efficient CO]]]

[[[2]]]

[[[ recovery from natural gas]]]In Japan, BASF has linked up with local companies JGC and INPEX to perform demonstration tests with a new technology for effectively capturing and recovering CO2 contained in natural gas. The tests were started in August 2010 at INPEX’s Koshijihara natural gas plant in Nagaoka City.JGC and BASF in began developing the High Pressure Acid Gas Capture Technology (HiPACT) in 2004. This process shows a “significantly higher” CO2 absorption, compared with existing processes, and is capable of regenerating the solvent under high pressure conditions. An important milestone will be to transfer the new technology to an operating gas processing plant.HiPACT should help reduce overall power consumption in the facility while also lowering investment costs. Because the gas is released from the solvent at well above atmospheric pressure there is also  a significant reduction in the amount of energy required for high pressure applications such as chemical synthesis or underground sequestration.&#xa0;We would not be involved in pilot projects if we did not believe carbon capture technologies were likely to present significant commercial opportunities in future. For example, in the Middle East demand for purified CO2 is increasing, in particular to raise yields in crude oil production (by means of enhanced oil recovery) and in urea production.There are and will be markets for Carbon Capture technologies even if Carbon Capture and Storage proves to be an unworkable or uneconomic choice for climate change mitigation. CCS is still a very expensive and unproven way to mitigate CO2 emissions from industrial processes and generation. It reduces efficiency and productivity compared to processes without CCS. It is some way from being cost competitive with the best alternative carbon reduction technologies. At the current time, without a comparable  global price for the carbon, the introduction of CCS within the UK or EU unilaterally, would lead to higher energy bills for domestic consumers and competitive disadvantages for industry. This would be true for both energy-intensive industry (due to higher electricity prices) and for carbon-intensive industry (that would have to introduce their own CCS).Nevertheless, if there were a global price for carbon, CCS might have advantages:Policy measures to encourage CCS in the UK and EU should not seek to put a high cost burden on domestic companies and consumers. They should focus on the development and demonstration of future (and lower cost) CCS technology through targeted funding, rather than deployment subsidies. If UK CCS demonstrations are generously subsidised, and UK industry is forced to pay for this through electricity market reform and / or inadequate energy intensive industry exemptions - one clear consequence is that manufacturing suppliers to CCS projects based in the UK will be less competitive than those not paying the subsidies outside the UK. Support for CCS, like other low carbon technologies carries a strong risk of creating a ‘green growth paradox’. Making a market but unmaking the domestic industry required to service it. Public finance for R&amp;D is though essential for CCS. Private investors alone will not take on the risk of a technology that has no market without significant sustained government intervention to create one.  Public subsidies are only acceptable for the pilot phase of new technologies and have to be reduced according to the cost reduction. Longer term subsidies which have to be paid by other market participants are not acceptable.Social acceptance is crucial. The extensive development and operation of appropriate sites and a nationwide network of pipelines will require dialogue with the public and NGOs. A single legal framework is also helpful. Regional variation - as in Germany - has led to some states blocking pilots. Technology nationalism will not help deliver CCS. It is unlikely any one country will have comparative advantage in every aspect of the CCS value chain.  CCS expertise is global.  Our spread of projects in the EU, US and Asia we hope demonstrates the benefits and spread of multilateral partnerships.  We, or rather our Wingas Storage subsidiary at Saltfleetby (currently in transition to Gazprom subject to a Commission competition ruling), have already found the UK market for storage solutions to be challenging. &#xa0;Altogether, RWE is spending around €9 million on the Niederaussem development project. The German federal government contributed about €4 million to the cost of the pilot plant. The North Carolina project is being supported in part by a $2 million grant from the US Department of Energy.  The ambition of the current and previous Government to make the UK a global export champion for CCS technologies is bold. It has not happened yet and might be more credible if narrowly focused on specific parts of the value chain with serious potential for comparative advantage. It might be more credible for the UK to focus on partnership rather than leadership within international teams. We recognise internationalism is a part of the UK approach, but  premised on an assumption collaboration will be delivered by companies that have succeeded in the UK first, based around the pilot projects that have been two years away from starting for much of the last decade.  We do not then believe the UK can or will be global leaders in all CCS technologies and suspect the desire to ‘build it here’, evident since the aborted BP Peterhead project (2007), has held back, not helped the commercialisation and export of ‘invented here’ technologies. We suspect further there has been less ‘invented here’ as a result of seeking UK-led projects rather than partnerships of the willing. These could lower UK costs, while broadening the pool of  expertise involved, and improving the prospects for future commercial success. For example, for the manufacture of BASF’s future CCS intermediates to take place in the UK, even those based on hypothetical UK science partnerships, there would have to be significant evidence of comparative advantage from the tax, planning and regulatory regime, local expertise, and appropriate sites. We would need to see evidence of an emerging CCS hub both domestic and for export, and multiple partners, to spread risk and accelerate innovation. We would likely seek to invest in and partner with emerging SMEs or adapt existing plant rather than build from scratch. All of this would need to be significantly and relatively more attractive than current opportunities in other countries - many of which are ahead of the UK in respect of CCS projects and pilots – many of which have established cost advantages for skills and supply in Intermediate Chemicals. We do agree with the strong focus in the strategy placed on cost-reduction. We do agree with many of the ideas put forward by the report of the CCS Cost Reduction Task Force. We do again though think too much attention is being given to domestic pilots and projects and not enough to selecting markets and partners with lower cost profiles than the UK. August 2013&#xa0;