&#xa0;Written evidence from Simon Norton (TIC 023)&#xa0;&#xa0;1. Summary of the most important recommendations.&#xa0;I start with three general strategies aimed at improving the service to isolated communities.&#xa0;1.1: Use all available transport. When a vehicle that can carry passengers makes a regular journey in an area not otherwise well served, open it up to the public at large. This includes school buses, postbuses, and out of service positioning workings.&#xa0;1.2: Tap all available markets. The same runs are often suitable for trips from villages to schools, workplaces and shops, for leisure visits from town to country, and for other purposes too. All these can help keep services running.&#xa0;1.3: Use all available routes. If a regular service has two route options, each serving a different community, then don't concentrate on one community and leave the other isolated.&#xa0;And here are my main recommendations aimed at implementing these strategies.(Further recommendations will be added later.)&#xa0;1.4: Local transport authorities (LTAs) should be required to include in their local transport plans statements of what level of service each community can expect.&#xa0;1.5: LTAs should be required to offer (means tested) compensation to residents of isolated communities, graduated according to the depth of isolation. This would give them the incentive to ensure that as many communities as possible were adequately served, and could rely on this through the Local Transport Plan.&#xa0;1.6: One of the main arguments against raising fuel tax is the effect on people in isolated communities. Higher fuel taxes offset by the isolation allowance could raise revenue to fund both the isolation allowance and service improvements to reduce isolation.&#xa0;1.7: LTAs should have powers to impose a franchise system on corridors where commercial operators were providing services in such a way as to make it uneconomic to rescue communities from isolation by adding tendered services.&#xa0;1.8: Passenger Focus should draw up a good practice guide for LTAs.&#xa0;This would give LTAs incentives (1.5), money (1.6), powers (1.7) and knowledge (1.8) to minimise isolation, and communities could rely on an assured level of service (1.4).&#xa0;2. Introduction -- why is the issue significant?&#xa0;This inquiry is long overdue. For far too long our society has isolated communities on the pretext that each individual community is not large enough to support a service that most people would consider adequate, and without considering the possibility that a more holistic approach might solve the problem.&#xa0;In most sectors of the economy, trends in recent decades have been to reduce the effort people need to gain access to goods and services. People are no longer expected to grow their own food (and even cooking can be dispensed with nowadays), make their own clothes, build and repair their own houses, teach their own children or diagnose their own diseases. In more modern times, access to the Internet has become important, but by and large local authorities have provided the prerequisites in public libraries so people do not need to own computers. The spread of mobile phones has hit users of callboxes badly, but email has made telephones less and less necessary, and I personally often go for weeks without making any calls. Yet in increasing areas of the country they are expected to provide and operate their own vehicles. Why?&#xa0;3. Isolation and human rights.&#xa0;Let's have a look at isolation in the context of human rights legislation (all references are taken from Wikipedia).&#xa0;3.1: In the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), Article 2 of Protocol 4 asserts a right to freedom of travel (within national borders). The UK hasn't ratified this protocol, but as this appears to be due to its fear that the provision might be misused by illegal immigrants, it should have no objection in principle to asserting a right to travel for UK citizens and others legally resident in or visiting the UK.&#xa0;3.2: Article 14 of the ECHR asserts a right to freedom from discrimination. Among the grounds listed is "property", implying that freedom of travel should not be confined to people owning or having access to a car. As noted above, transport is unique in modern society as a sector access to which is to some extent dependent on property qualifications.&#xa0;3.3: Unfortunately, people without access to cars cannot assert a right to travel under Article 14 because the freedom from discriminaton principle only applies to rights under the ECHR. The UK has rejected Protocol 12, which would extend protection against discrimination to all legal rights, though it agrees that the bar on discrimination should extend beyond people's rights under the ECHR. In any case, Article 14 may be used to assert a right to travel where this is needed for people to exercise other ECHR rights.&#xa0;3.4: In our domestic legislation, the Equalities Act does provide a bar against a wide range of discrimination. Unfortunately, it can only be invoked by members of certain "protected groups", thus making them, as it were, more equal than people outside these groups. It might be argued that isolation discriminates against people who belong to one of these protected groups for a reason that prevents them from driving a car (e.g. certain categories of disability). But surely the way forward in combating isolation is to extend the scope of the Equalities Act so that people without access to cars form an additional protected group. As with disabled people, the Act should not require local authorities or anyone else to take more than "reasonable" steps to satisfy the travel needs of people without cars, but by asserting a principle it could help to change the perceptions of society.&#xa0;4. The special status of transport.&#xa0;As a service which can only be accessed by people owning and able to operate the relevant product, one would be hard put to it to come up with a worse example than transport, for the following reasons:&#xa0;4.1: Transport is a necessity in modern society. Few people can get to work, education, medical treatment, shopping, leisure and social activities solely by walking. Even for journeys that are short enough and people who are at least moderately fit, cycling is often unattractive and even unsafe option on today's roads, thus entailing a need for motor transport.&#xa0;4.2: Many people are either unable to drive a motor vehicle or, perhaps because of their temperament, a danger to society at large when they are on the road.&#xa0;4.3: Cars are unaffordable for many people and cut a large hole in other people's discretionary spending.&#xa0;4.4: Cars are space-hungry and many people live or work in areas with no room for them.&#xa0;4.5: Cars are intrusive, imposing massive noise, pollution and safety problems on society (in addition to the safety problems caused by individual drivers, as referred to in 4.2).&#xa0;4.6: Cars are responsible for a large share of the UK's and the world's climate change emissions. Climate change is almost certainly the greatest threat to the future of human civilisation.&#xa0;For all these reasons, as a matter of urgency our society needs to develop, and encourage the use of, alternative modes of transport -- and to stop penalising people without access to cars.&#xa0;5. What is isolation?&#xa0;How should isolation be defined? Clearly, it's a matter of degree, but let's define it as the inability to make journeys important in modern society -- those described in 4.1. We'd regard the following level of provision as sufficient to deal with most complaints of isolation:&#xa0;5.1: Peak time services for access to work or education. In congested areas, people should be able to get in before the morning peak when journey times are often unreliable.&#xa0;5.2: Regular services, say at least every 2 hours, between the peaks, for access to shops, medical treatment, to undertake personal business and to connect with the longer distance network.&#xa0;5.3: Evening services for access to entertainment, to visit family or friends and to get to society meetings, and to return from longer journeys (in particular people should be able to return from their local metropolis, if any, late enough to avoid any restrictions on off peak tickets).&#xa0;5.4: Sunday services for access to shops, day trips, and to return from weekends away. The last two will require services to continue after shops have closed.&#xa0;5.5: We should also mention visits by city-dwellers to the countryside. Country walking should be encouraged for the sake of people's health, access to our rural heritage is an important part of people's quality of life, and tourism is an important employer, so in the interests of sustainable tourism we need to ensure that people can get to major places of interest, both on Sundays, when services are often few or non-existent, and on Mon-Fri, when an important problem is highlighted in 7.2.2 below.&#xa0;This is a very broad definition of isolation -- even in Cambridge many areas have no buses on Sunday evenings. Of course it is not on a par with the isolation faced by communities that don't even have services for travel to work (which is probably the "tipping point" in making communities almost completely car dependent).&#xa0;6. How has isolation developed?&#xa0;6.1: One major landmark was the publication of the Buchanan Report in 1963. This noted that car ownership was spreading as fast as people's ability to afford a car. This could have been seen as a signal about the inadequacy of public transport, as surely would a similar flight to private education or medical treatment. But instead it was seen as an inevitable trend, and the question was asked whether saturation car ownership and use was compatible with a decent environment. The report said that it could be done with major re-engineering of our urban environment.&#xa0;6.2: The report mentioned the plight of people who would never have access to cars, but as a small residual problem, and with no convincing solution. And this problem was largely ignored by policymakers.&#xa0;6.3: The re-engineering of our urban environment proved beyond our means, so cars still dominate most of our urban environments, probably contributing to the decline of traditional town centres.&#xa0;6.4: The same year, the Beeching Report was published, calling for a major contraction of the rail network. While not all the closures implemented around this time were because of the report, it can hardly be disputed that at the time railways were seen as dispensable.&#xa0;6.5: The loss of rail links became important when, as a sweetener to railway privatisation, the Government mandated minimum service standards for those places that still had trains; except on the most rural routes these places have managed to avoid isolation, with even village stations often having hourly services into late evening 7 days a week. By comparison, Sturminster Newton, a town on the Somerset &amp; Dorset route (widely acknowledged as one of the worst Beeching closures) with 4292 people in the 2011 census, now has no evening or Sunday buses at all, and even its Saturday service is threatened; the daytime service is only 2 hourly. And too much of the old trackbed has been lost to make restoration a viable proposition.&#xa0;6.6: Since 1993, usage of our railways has rocketed, partly due to people's recognition that travel time aboard trains can be used productively. While this also applies to buses, their usage has by contrast been in a trend of decline, only stemmed by initiatives such as free travel for older people.&#xa0;6.7: This surely shows that, just as our railways were mismanaged in the Beeching era, so were and are our buses. In many areas they are still expected to pay their way; places dependent on supported services often have such poor service as to drive away anyone without access to a car with any choice. The concept of "localism", which has considerable attraction as a principle, is completely inappropriate to bus provision of for the following reasons:&#xa0;6.7.1: The local councillors who decide on the level of supported services rarely depend on buses themselves -- in contrast with, say, schools -- though this hasn't stopped the Government from seeking to develop schools independent of local authority control.&#xa0;6.7.2: Many people use buses in LTA areas other than that in which they live, so don't have even a vestige of a democratic voice in their provision.&#xa0;6.7.3: There is no effective method of sharing best practice among local authorities, many of whom stick with the ways they have found of not solving the problems of isolation.&#xa0;6.7.4: Provision of effective bus networks is hindered by lack of cross boundary cooperation. For example, the Aylesbury-Luton route runs commercially on Mon-Sat, but the services provided on the corridor on Sundays by Bucks and Central Beds don't link up. Comprehensive provision is particularly important for public transport, because a prospective journey can be sabotaged by the loss of a single link in the chain, as seen above. Also, if people need cars for some journeys, they're likely to use them even for trips where public transport is still adequate, thereby undermining the whole network (the "domino effect").&#xa0;6.7.5: The idea behind localism is that central government can't micromanage local bus networks. But it can set the incentives to encourage local authorities to work towards a coordinated network. At present the incentives are actually perverse -- the Government's war on local authority spending encourages cuts to all non-statutory spending however great the social need; the system of concessionary pass reimbursement makes LTAs pay the fares of visitors with passes, which they're naturally disinclined to do; insufficient rates of reimbursement put part of the burden of support for commercial services on fare paying passengers, if any; and there's the domino effect described above.&#xa0;6.8: In addition, isolation has been exacerbated by the following factors:&#xa0;6.8.1: Deregulation enables private operators to cherry-pick profitable parts of the network, missing out villages that can only support reasonable levels of service as part of a coordinated network. Take for example Marsworth in Bucks, which lost its hourly service when the Aylesbury-Luton route was diverted to serve a new housing estate in a nearby village.&#xa0;6.8.2: Bad design of housing estates, where buses have to use long winded routes to serve them properly, or where the streets are too narrow to encourage commercial operators to send buses through them (sometimes because part of the available width is taken up by parked cars). Both problems are exemplified at the new Fairfield Park estate in Central Beds, where efficient provision would require a through road to Arlesey village. Such bad design is encouraged by the planning system, whereby a local authority that turns down a planning application risks heavy costs if it loses on appeal.&#xa0;6.8.3: Problems with right turns to/from major roads, which may be barred by the road layout, considered unsafe, or entail long delays awaiting a gap in the traffic. An example is Upper Caldecote in Central Beds, where the route giving best coverage of the village would entail a right turn into the A1 for eastbound journeys.&#xa0;6.8.4: Problems with lack of stops. For example a section of the A35 with 3 bus routes passes under a bridge less than half a mile from Hardy's Cottage in Dorset (National Trust) and linked to it by a public right of way, but because there's no stop there intending visitors have a much longer and less pleasant walk. Hindhead, a well known attraction in the Surrey Hills AONB, lost its National Express service a few days after the opening of a bypass with a road layout that imposed a large time penalty on buses stopping in the vicinity. It has local buses, but not on Sundays. And, in Cambs, Cambridge-Oxford buses bypass Cambourne, and Cambridge-Peterborough buses pass close to Silton but at a place cut off from it by a motorway. Both villages have other bus services but not at certain times and not in both directions.&#xa0;6.8.5: The fragmentation of the bus network between different operators and LTAs has made it much harder to market the network as a whole. Such marketing could develop patronage, for example if teenagers were taught to plan their own leisure trips around the countryside maybe they'd remain regular bus users in adulthood. Particularly important is to encourage city dwellers to use buses in their surrounding rural areas -- something which in London ceased when London's "green" buses were hived off from London Transport in 1970. There is no agency responsible for developing rural services used mainly for leisure by people visiting from a different local authority area -- a task performed by the Countryside Commission until that was abolished some time ago.&#xa0;6.8.6: The trend towards off centre supermarkets has made it difficult to provide common facilities for people wanting to buy food and those needing access to other facilities still concentrated in town centres.&#xa0;7. Strategies for change.&#xa0;We now expand on the 3 basic strategies mentioned in 1.1-3, dealing with each in turn.&#xa0;7.1: Use all available transport. This can cover the following:&#xa0;7.1.1. School and college buses. As local authorities have an obligation to provide transport to school, these can provide a basic service for even remote communities, at times allowing a variety of day out opportunities (see also 7.1.2 below). Many services to secondary schools use routes long enough to be useful. Sometimes these are opposed on the grounds of danger to children, but lots of children use unarguably public services without any problems. Actually, a more likely problem is that many people don't like to travel on buses used mainly by schoolchildren -- but this is no reason not to give them the option.&#xa0;7.1.2: Positioning workings -- from bus depots to the start of service, from the end of a service to the start of the next, and from their last run back to the depot. These have to run anyway, so when other transport is lacking why not make them available to the general public? It should, for example, be possible for people to travel from a village on a school bus and transfer to the associated positioning working of another bus serving the same or a nearby school, returning the same way in the afternoon, thus providing a great variety of day trip opportunities.&#xa0;7.1.3: Postbuses carrying both passengers and mail. There used to be over250 of these, mainly in Scotland, but all but a handful have now disappeared. But they can still provide useful facilities for both local residents and visitors, sometimes in conjunction with other initiatives (e.g. people might travel one way on a school bus and the other on a postbus). Most attractive are likely to be "collection" runs during which mail is collected from postboxes, and one might also be able to develop "mainline" delivery runs from sorting offices to local post offices from which delivery would be made by bike or on foot.&#xa0;7.1.4: Rail replacement buses -- these can open up special opportunities on days when lines are closed for engineering work. An example is Clouds Hill (Lawrence of Arabia's cottage in Dorset, owned by the National Trust), on the road used by buses linking Wool and Moreton when the line is closed. The same route also passes Monkeyworld and goes near Pallington Lakes Sculpture Park, so it could provide a full day out which might attract people from a considerable area. They can also be used to serve towns whose nearest stations are badly located. For example, Cirencester (Glos) is about 4 miles from the nearest station at Kemble. A replacement bus between Swindon and Kemble has to pass through Cirencester, so why can't it stop there to serve the town, whose only evening or Sunday buses are National Express coaches, few of which serve Swindon?&#xa0;7.1.5: There may be other opportunities to create public bus services, e.g. by allowing the public onto works services. Or take the "newspaper bus" which used to carry passengets to/from Inversnaid in Stirling district as well. All that's needed to develop a bus service is a vehicle with seating that runs at more or less regular times.&#xa0;7.2: Develop all available patronage. This is the opposite of the concept of "retreating to one's core market" -- usually a signal that an organisation is on its way down. Some examples:&#xa0;7.2.1: School buses are often well timed for journeys to work, but can't fulfil this role unless there are journeys during the school holidays and afternoon return journeys. These could be run on a demand responsive basis, only running where passengers needed to go; and then they could also be used to take visitors to/from farmhouse accommodation, thus helping to support the rural economy.&#xa0;7.2.2: Many rural buses used mainly by local shoppers could also carry leisure visitors from the cities but for restrictions on off peak fares that prevent them from getting to the starting point in time. We need to reduce restrictions on off peak fares for journeys against the direction of peak flow.&#xa0;7.2.3: Rural buses and trains could be timed to meet at interchanges, providing a Swiss style integrated network that provides seamless journeys within a large catchment area.&#xa0;7.2.4: In some cases longer distance coaches on main roads could usefully serve intermediate points otherwise difficult to get to, perhaps requiring the provision of stopping facilities, bridges to enable people to get across the road, and improved footpaths to link stops with nearby villages. There may also be routes where such local connections could help to justify a new inter-urban link, e.g. on the A14 corridor between Cambridge and Rugby, which would both speed up many journeys across the South Midlands and rescue a large number of communities from isolation.&#xa0;7.2.5: Finally, a couple of specific examples illustrating points that might also occur elsewhere. The White Bus links Ascot with Windsor through Windsor Great Park. A modified route could take visitors to the Savill Garden and Valley Gardens. And at Cliveden in Bucks, the National Trust house is open to visitors on Thursdays and Sundays, but the bus service runs on Tuesdays and Fridays.&#xa0;7.3: Use all available routes for mainstream services. This would aim to reverse the tendency mentioned in 6.8.1 for operators to "cherry-pick" the more profitable areas. Here are a couple of examples in Cambs, on the A1 corridor each side of Huntingdon.&#xa0;Not long ago the hourly bus service between Huntingdon and Peterborough was recast to omit Alconbury, Alconbury Weston, Glatton and Stilton. (This is the one mentioned in 6.8.4 which is cut off from Stilton by a motorway.) A separate service, finishing earlier, runs between Peterborough and Stilton. However the Alconburys and Glatton now have to rely on a community bus, with 6-7 journeys serving the Alconburys (from Huntingdon only, notPeterborough) but a mere 3 to Glatton (including a schooltime commercial service). A better designed route network would give all villages on the corridor at least a 2 hourly service (thus satisfying one of the minimum service requirements suggested in 5.2) while still providing the speeding up the operator wanted.&#xa0;And until recently the hourly bus between Huntingdon and St Neots went alternately via Little and Great Paxton. The former also served Southoe, but northbound only thanks to the crossing problems mentioned in 6.8.3, with a separate supported service taking villagers south to St Neots. The Great Paxton route also served Offord Cluny and Offord Darcy. Now, all buses use the A1 corridor with no stop near Southoe, and the Offords and Great Paxton have just 1-2 buses a day. All that was really needed was the provision of a footbridge linking Southoe with a southbound stop thus enabling the withdrawal of the supported service mentioned above.&#xa0;8. Demand responsive transport.&#xa0;This is sometimes touted as a universal panacea for isolated areas, and does indeed have many advantages, but it is important to recognise what it can and cannot do.&#xa0;Some local authorities (e.g. Beds and Worcs) introduced demand responsive schemes but later abandoned them when they found that passengers weren't making good use of them. Others have adopted the idea as their norm. It is difficult for the uninitiated to tell whether this is because the schemes are working well for passengers or because the local authority doesn't really care whether it suits people's needs. The moral is that for demand responsive transport, even more than for fixed route transport, we need proper guidelines and monitoring.&#xa0;The simplest kind of demand responsive transport, which needs no specific arrangements, is the bus that serves a community only when there are passengers to drop off. But, on the Saturday route in Bucks which passes close to the National Trust's Stowe Landscape Gardens, people need to be able to travel out on the midday journey and ask the driver to pick them up in the afternoon. In cases where there is a call centre available, passengers making single journeys could also arrange for drivers to pick them up.&#xa0;Any scheme involving call centres has to recognise the limits of the telephone system -- there are many reasons why people shouldn't be made to rely on mobile phones. Other hazards are being asked to give a number to be rung back on at a time when one isn't available, or a misunderstanding as to the exact pickup point (both of these have happened to me).&#xa0;8.1: Here are guidelines for a "good" demand responsive service.&#xa0;8.1.1: The service should be clearly advertised as being open to all without restriction. Registration, if available, should be voluntary so people don't have to provide personal information just for a one-off journey. Also, it should be stated clearly whether people who intend to pick a service up at a "compulsory" stop but leave at a demand responsive stop have to book.&#xa0;8.1.2: Freephone numbers should be used for the benefit of people ringing from callboxes.&#xa0;8.1.3: Same day bookings should be possible, at least for journeys starting after the morning peak. Having to book on a Friday to travel the next Monday is particularly unacceptable.&#xa0;8.1.4: Timings at main stops should be fixed (even if only approximately) and publicised (including on Traveline). This would enable people to plan complete itineraries at home before confirming them at the time of booking; it would also enable people to pick up one of the relevant services without prebooking if they were willing to risk the driver being unable to take them to their intended destination. In general, to minimise the need for passengers to book, on any particular journey a stop used more than 2/3 of the time should be compulsory.&#xa0;8.1.5: The main performance measure which should be monitored is the proportion of passengers wishing to book on a specific journey (as per the publicity offered, see above) but unable to be accommodated.&#xa0;8.2: Here are some useful modes of demand responsive operation.&#xa0;8.2.1: Connectional services -- these leave a given point after or arrive before the arrival or departure of specified connecting buses or trains. These could also offer flexible services at slack times (e.g. in the evenings or on Sundays) on corridors which at busier times have a fixed route service.&#xa0;8.2.2: Corridor services -- these would typically provide several journeys a day linking two market towns which don't have a regular conventional bus link. Specific journeys would serve designated groups of intermediate villages -- not necessarily the same for each journey -- calling at whichever villages had passengers to pick up or set down.&#xa0;8.2.3: "Journey to work" services -- see 7.2.1 for the role these could fill.&#xa0;9. Detailed recommendations. Our main recommendations have already been outlined in 1.4-8 above.&#xa0;If a local authority opposes a new development because of inadequate public transport accessibility, but the developer wins on appeal, it should have to pay isolation allowances to residents (or support enough buses to avoid isolation), thus ensuring that the planning system doesn't entrench isolation and car dependence.&#xa0;People living in villages within reasonable walking distance of more frequent services, by a safe route, would have their isolation allowances assessed on the basis that they could walk to such villages where necessary. Exceptions would, however, be made for those unable to walk longer distances, or who might have problems doing so on some journeys (e.g. because of carrying heavy shopping). Similar provision might be made for cycling, provided that cycle routes were safe and reasonably secure cycle parking was available. Access to demand responsive services would be taken into account in assessing isolation allowances, but these would have to meet standards such as those suggested in 8.1.1-5 above.&#xa0;To improve access to bus stops, the powers of local authorities to buy land compulsorily for new bus stops, crossings and footpath links (both along roads and across fields) to nearby villages and places of interest would be extended, and funding would be provided (also financed from higher fueltax) to help them pay for this. And the Highways Agency should be required to make its schemes bus-friendly.&#xa0;While LTAs would be given powers to franchise services on certain corridors if this was the only reasonable way of serving all communities adequately, such franchises need not be exclusive (i.e. other operators could be allowed to provide supplementary services on the corridor, or even paid to do so as part of a separate supported service), but there should be reserve powers to guard against "wrecking operations" by competitive operators.&#xa0;Regarding local transport plans, it is surely anomalous that these can be compiled without reference to the issue of most concern to bus users -- how frequent a service they can expect. This would also put bus users on a par with rail users, who have minimum standards for their services laid down in the franchise agreements of their train operators.&#xa0;Regarding the suggestion of a good practice guide for LTAs, here are some suggested standards (limited to what is needed to avoid isolation).&#xa0;(a) Neighbourhoods in cities and main regional centres, and the centres of larger free standing towns: half hourly daytime, hourly evenings and Sundays.&#xa0;(b) Smaller free standing towns and large villages: hourly daytime, some evening and Sunday service, with access to entertainment at least on Fridays and Saturdays, but services running at least till mid evening 7 days a week.&#xa0;(c) All but the remotest villages: peak services as per 5.1 and 2 hourly services between the peaks.&#xa0;(d) All villages: services to school, work, and, on at least 2 days per week, shopping (with the possibility of using the school or work bus in at least one direction).&#xa0;(e) Important rural places of interest should have public transport access at times suitable for visitors and compatible with their own opening times.&#xa0;I also propose the following:&#xa0;9.1: In England, concessionary passholders travelling outside their area on buses equipped with smartcard readers would be paid for by the local authority where they live, not the one where they board the bus. Also, reimbursement rates should increase; even if this means that operators are over-reimbursed, the money is likely to end up helping to support the system as a whole.&#xa0;9.2: Train operators would be required to allow the use of off peak tickets by passengers travelling out of cities in the morning, when the direction of peak flow is into the cities.&#xa0;9.3: One of more existing or new agencies concerned with rural affairs would be tasked with developing services for visitors to the countryside. This could be financed from within the countryside budget and/or fuel tax proceeds. Details of useful leisure services (including those run commercially or wholly sponsored by the local authority) would be disseminated on a regional and national basis. This would help daytrippers and holidaymakers select a destination, and also encourage local authorities to participate wholeheartedly in such schemes in order to help develop their tourist industries.&#xa0;9.4: People without access to cars should become a "protected group" under the Equalities Act.&#xa0;9.5: Familiarisation with the use of public transport, including in rural areas, should form part of the National Curriculum. Furthermore, people should be tested on this as part of the driving test (and also on cycling), to curb the tendency for people to jump into their cars without considering alternative options for the journey they are currently making.&#xa0;9.6: While the above recommendations would result in eventual easing of isolation problems, the problem is surely urgent enough to call for interim measures; however I do not intend to identify here what measures would be cost-effective and could be implemented quickly.&#xa0;10. Answers to the Committee's questions.&#xa0;10.1: How should demand for transport in isolated communities be identified?5.1-5 show the main types of journeys people are likely to want to make.&#xa0;10.2: To what extent are the needs of different groups of people taken into account? Of the groups mentioned, provision for disabled people is patchy, but, as non-DDA compliant buses are phased out and disability awareness is phased in, their main problem is likely to be the lack of any suitable services at all. For older people, provision is discouraged by the concessionary fares reimbursement system -- see 6.7.5. Young people, for whom driving is likely to be unaffordable because of insurance rates, and many of whom have high transport requirements (e.g. for journeys to work, to nightlife, and to see their families at weekends), are particularly hard done by.&#xa0;10.3: What are the main challenges in providing better and more consistent services and how can they be overcome? For the first part of this question, the main challenges are probably deregulation (see 6.8.1), fragmentation (see 6.8.5), lack of national guidance (see 6.7.3), and funding (see 6.7.5). Funding would be less of a problem if real efforts were made to develop patronage (particularly among fare paying passengers) as recommended in 7.2. All our recommendations would help to solve the problems involved.&#xa0;10.4: How effective is community transport and how can it be improved? At present it largely fulfils the following roles: (a) To provide limited services on routes that "fall between the cracks". (b) To enable tendered services to be provided more cheaply than by commercial operators. (c) On a private hire basis, to help support special events otherwise inaccessible without a car. (d) To provide what might be called special needs transport for essential journeys that can't be undertaken by public transport.&#xa0;The main obstacle to the development of community transport is that there is a limited supply of volunteer drivers. With regard to (a), if the mainstream network were more comprehensive, then resources would be released to plug gaps that aren't filled at present. Event organisers need to be made aware of the potential as regards (c).&#xa0;10.5: To what extent should people in isolated areas be expected to rely on taxis and other demand responsive transport? As regards conventional taxis, people shouldn't have to use them for routine journeys such as local shopping; and we reject the idea that local authorities have a responsibility to keep them in business by not providing good public transport (including demand responsive services). Whether public transport are provided on a fixed route or demand responsive basis (the latter including taxibuses and taxi sharing schemes with fares similar to those for conventional buses) should depend on the geography of the area, with fixed routes used where these can easily cover all communities on the relevant corridor.&#xa0;10.6: What are the main challenges with funding services in isolated communities and how can they be made more affordable? (From the context I assume that this means "more affordable by local authorities" rather than "more affordable by users".) Improving patronage by the means suggested in7.2 should be part of the solution. One should bear in mind the principle of contributory revenue, whereby the cost of providing heavily subsidised services can be offset by revenue generated on other sections of longer distance journeys made as a result. And if the idea of an isolation allowance successfully undercut the opposition to higher fuel taxes it would open up a very large funding stream to help combat isolation.&#xa0;August 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;