&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence on behalf of Portia, Dr]]]

[[[.]]]

[[[ Elizabeth Pollitzer, Director]]]

[[[, 25 August 2013]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]Executive SummaryBackground of the OrganisationPortia is a not-for-profit organisation (http://www.portiaweeb.org.uk) based in the UK, originally established in 1997 by a group of women scientists at Imperial College to advance gender equality in STEM.  Most recently, Portia led the influential European FP7-funded project genSET (http://www.genderinscience.org).  genSET asked science leaders to examine the research evidence on gender issues in science and produce a consensus report with recommendations for action at institutional level.  This resulted in a report with 13 specific and achievable recommendations. In 2011, genSET created the Gender Summit platform, http://www.gender-summit.com to continue the dialogue between the scientists, policy makers and gender scholars, to jointly consider the research evidence and agree on the actions needed to address gender problems and improve quality of research. &#xa0;Information for the Committee&#xa0;Why do numbers of women in STEM academic careers decline further up the career ladder?&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]1. Taking the EU as a whole, 80% of A-Grade (full professor) academic positions are taken by men. This is a little lower than 10 years ago, down from 85%.  The average female professor figure for the UK is 20.8% (taking all universities together); among the top 10 universities it ranges between 14% (Imperial College) and 33.8% (University of Bristol).2. The historical absence of women in research – as participants, as subjects, and as beneficiaries – has resulted in science having more evidence for men than for women, and in the ‘male’ being accepted as the norm in study design, and in the application and communication of research. The efficacy of research, therefore, is not the same for women and for men. For example, nearly all that is known about the effects of environmental pollution is based on studies involving men, but overwhelmingly, pollutants affect women and men differently.  3. When researchers do pay attention to biological and social differences between women and men, stunning discoveries follow.  For example, muscle-derived female stem cells have better regenerative properties than equivalent male cells, and the metabolic profiles of women and men are distinctly different. Findings such as these have huge implications for diagnosis and therapy, and for health economics. A brief overview of when and why sex and gender matter in science can be found in a 2-page “A-Z Guide Why Gender Matters in R&amp;D” produced by Portia, which is available at http://www.portiaweb.org.uk/index.php/publications. It is not only health where it matters what is female and what is male.4. Promotion to professorial positions requires sound record of research grant applications and performance as Principal Investigator (PI).  But fewer women than men apply for research grants - in numbers that correlate to how many women are present at professorial levels. Critically, when women do apply, they are minimally but systematically less successful than men in being awarded a grant, even in fields where they are well represented, such as Life Sciences and Social Science, as shown in Figure 1 below. 5.  Women apply for smaller grants, receiving on an average of £44,735 less per grant than men.  This means that they have less money to engage additional researches in their projects (e.g. to provide statistical or data analysis support) than the better funded male PIs.  6. It is important to demonstrate intellectual independence during the early career stage and establish a sufficient author status by being the primary author and publishing papers in high impact journals.  But even at this stage, men tend to hold higher status positions and have bigger labs whilst women have greater teaching loads, as well as the main burden of family responsibilities, so have fewer hours for research compared to men and produce fewer research papers, which puts them at a clear disadvantage in selection processes that use men’s productivity as the norm.7. Figure 1 below compares the success rates for women and men across the three areas funded by European Research Council (ERC): Physical and Engineering Sciences, Life Science, and Social Sciences.  Across all three areas men received more grants than women.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;8.  Furthermore, Table 1 below compares the gender balance found among ERC project teams with the gender balance found among the complimentary groups of researchers based in universities.  This Table show that men are routinely favoured in the appointments to ERC research teams, starting from PhD level and continuing at each next career development step, and this advantage is greater than could be justified by how many women and men are available in the system at each level. So, for example, at PhD level, ERC grants engaged 38% of women and 62% of men, which compares to 49% of female PhDs and 51% of male PhDs across EU universities.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;9. Each ERC grant creates an opportunity to engage between 5-7 additional researchers to support the PI.  The 3400 grants awarded to-date would create opportunities for involving an additional 20,000 researchers, in total.  Around 20% of ERC grants are hosted in the UK and they represent a very important channel for promoting the advancement of talented junior researchers by placing them among the PI’s peers and providing opportunities to gain valuable experience as collaborators, co-authors, and members of influential academic networks. If women are overlooked when project teams are established, they are left out from research career pathways that can lead them to the top-level positions in STEM.10. As employers, UK universities have been increasingly adopting the Hay System of Job Evaluation.  This methodology originated in the 1950’s in the USA as a way to measure work and the payment levels for different types of work in manufacturing. It is not well suited to the collegial and team-based nature of academic world. Individuals are recruited to the specific pathway (e.g. teaching, teaching plus research, or primarily research) and can progress along the pathway but cannot move between pathways, e.g. from teaching to research.  This can create gender bias in recruitment, which cannot be corrected later, if men are recruited primarily to the research focused career pathways and women to the teaching-oriented ones, which they may accept not knowing the consequences as a way of managing the pressure of career-life responsibilities during early career stages.  &#xa0;When women leave academia, what careers do they transition into? What are the consequences of scientifically trained women applying their skills in different employment sectors?&#xa0;11. The experience of the Daphne Jackson Trust (http://www.daphnejackson.org), whose mission is to return women trained in STEM back to STEM after a family related career break would be an excellent source of this information.  The Trust was established almost 30 years ago by Prof Daphne Jackson, the first female physics professor in the UK, who observed that it would be inconceivable if society allowed Marie Curie stack shelves in the supermarket just because she had two children, and so it should not be right that talented women scientists are stopped from pursuing their career aspirations because they become mothers.  The Trust’s experience suggests that when women leave science they work as librarians, teachers, assistant editors, project managers, charity workers, in media, accountancy, and in admin-oriented jobs, i.e. mainly in roles where science training has no benefit.&#xa0;&#xa0;What should universities and the higher education sector do to retain women graduates and PhD students in academic careers? Are there examples of good practice?&#xa0;12.  27% of women but only 9% of men worry that a career in science will make it impossible for them to have a family.  Supporting women during the critical stage between PhD, the post-doc training, and early group leader is crucial.  For this, universities must recognise the negative influence of the societal ambivalence in attitudes to gender equality.  On the one hand, women are encouraged to pursue higher education and on the other they are discouraged from pursuing career aspirations on the same terms as men. 13. Science believes itself to be ‘gender neutral’ but this is an illusion that hides a whole range of gender bias effects. Universities need to be pro-active in encouraging women to apply for research grants, by making sure that women’s teaching loads are not bigger than those of men, and that they are mentored appropriately.  When project teams are formed, they should be guided to ensure gender balance.  When included as part of the team, women should not be overlooked when there are opportunities for collaboration, co-authorship or co-supervision of students, and in the engagement in academic networks (not just women’s networks).14. Universities must recognise the pernicious nature of gender stereotypes and of the gender bias effects in recruitment and promotion.  A study reported in 2012, led by Yale university, in which 127 science faculty from research-intensive universities were asked to rate the application materials of a student – who was randomly assigned either a male or female name – for a laboratory manager position, showed that both male and female professors rated the male applicant as significantly more competent and preferable to hire than the (identical) female applicant. They also offered the male applicant a higher starting salary and additional career mentoring support.  Scientists may be rigorously trained to be objective, but just like the society at large, hold gender beliefs that tend to valorise men’s progress. 15. In 2010, a panel of science leaders from across Europe met to evaluate available research evidence on gender issues in science. They agreed on 13 specific recommendations, which they felt could be implemented and would produce important benefits for individuals, their institutions, and to science. Their report is available at http://www.genderinscience.org . The recommendations call for integrated actions to improve: 1) science knowledge making, 2) institutional practices and processes, 3) creation of human capital, and 4) compliance with regulation.16. In Norway, despite the acceptance of the quota mechanism for women, not one university has as yet achieved even 30% target of women professors.  Universities must examine their processes and practices for sources of gender bias and weed them out. The University of Tromso implemented a trial evaluation process designed to simulate the promotion process, thereby ensuring that women candidates can be confident that they are ready for promotion before applying. The Tromso board has also set the conditions that all advertised positions will have search committees specifically charged with finding women applicants, requiring that the applicant pool for any particular position has no fewer than 40% women, and has made available funds for department chairs and deans to identify specific support measures such as short-term buy-outs from teaching duties, statistical support, research assistance, data processing support. 17. In the UK, the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) has made future research funding conditional on the academic partner achieving at least the Silver Award of the Athena SWAN Charter for Women in Science. The SWAN scheme was introduced in the UK ten years ago to promote gender equality in recruitment, advancement and promotion of female academics. Following the NIHR decision in 2011, applications to the SWAN Charter Award soared, trebling in number during 2012-2013.18.  Universities can also examine their approaches to managing their academic human resources to ensure that during recruitment women are not channeled into career pathways that limit opportunities to establish intellectual independence and assemble the solid record of research experience that is needed for advancement in STEM. 19.  Whilst science institutions may differ greatly in their overall strategies, and in their wish to maintain independence and ability to compete, they are responsible for gender equality in the distribution of research resources and of the associated career development opportunities.&#xa0;What role should the Government have in encouraging the retention of women in academic STEM careers?&#xa0;20.  The legal framework places responsibility for equality and diversity on universities as employers but this is a too narrow scope for addressing gender inequalities in science because it overlooks the social importance of science institutions and scientists, for example as policy advisers to the Government or guardians of the ethical and social responsibility concerns in the science governance. The Government could insist that the social importance of science is recognised by involving both women and men, equally, in science governance and in major policy consultative roles. 21. The Norwegian experience shows that universities can easily shrug-off policies promoting positive gender-balancing actions by claiming ‘excellence’ to be their main goal.  The Government could insist that the distribution of public research resources (to which women contribute as taxpayers) should not disadvantage women as researchers, as subjects of research and as beneficiaries of the societal investment in science and technology.22. The Government can also fine-tune the childcare support policies by recognising the special demands placed on women scientists (and men) during early career stage who have childcare responsibilities, such as having to attend conferences or work late in the lab to complete experiments.  Their childcare issues may be more complex and costs can be higher than those of the parents in other sectors, with few opportunities to increase income without taking time away from research.August 2013&#xa0; She Figures 2012, European Commission, Brussels 2012 ERC: European Research Council.  It awards grants to individuals, not institutions | DGG: German Research Foundation. Awards grants to individuals and to institutions | EMBO: European Molecular Biology Organisation. It awards research fellowships and grants enabling your researchers to transit to the role of small group leader.  Bedi, G.; Van Dam, N.T. and Munafo, M. (2012), "Gender inequality in awarded research grants", The Lancet, Vol. 380, No. 9840, pp. 474.&#xa0; Nosek, B.A. et al (2009), "National differences in gender–science stereotypes predict national sex differences in science and math achievement", PNAS, Vol. 106, No. 26, pp. 10593–10597.  Moss-Racusin, C.A. et al (2012), "Science faculty’s subtle gender biases favor male students", Psychological and Cognitive Sciences , Vol. 109, No. 41, pp.16474-16479.&#xa0;