                            

[[[LPG 06]]]

[[[Written submission from Eastern Shires Purchasing Organisation (LPG 06)]]]&#xa0;Local government has too little freedom to engage in commercial relationships which might deliver the best in respect of (inter alia) value for money, local resident involvement, long term relationships, etc.&#xa0;It’s easy to blame the Public Contracts Regulations (PCRs) and EU directives for this – but to a great extent it is true that there’s a fundamental mis-match between the worthy and sensible aspirations implied in the question, and the whole raison d’etre of the PCRs.  In their origins as an instrument of the European single market vision, the PCRs are (despite more recent tinkering) still designed to achieve the exact opposite of the good intentions enshrined in the whole localism movement.&#xa0;As a result, local government procurers are forced to adopt a strange sort of double identity, each half of which is inconsistent and irreconcilable with the other: we are on the one hand the defenders of (apologists for!) the Regulations and the deadening weight of ‘procedure’ which they impose on us, whilst at the same time we maintain this persona as the SME’s friend, as the people who understand the local community, and who yearn to develop great commercial solutions tailored around local needs.&#xa0;We are actually made to be very timid in our activities.  The reason we are so timid is because those same PCRs give licence to vexatiously minded companies to take us to Court for the slightest, most technical of transgressions.  The risks we so often have to weigh aren’t 

[[[real]]] risks to do with whether a supplier might be any good at doing what they promise, and the consequences if they fail, but pointless fabricated risks that this or that sentence in the ITT might be objected to by a bad loser!  As an example, look at the hurdles we have to leap here at ESPO if we want to use the competitive dialogue procedure.  Those hurdles are not there because there’s a fear that the procedure might deliver a solution that is poor value for money or ill thought out.  They are there because of a fear that we might be sued!  These risks exist right enough – but I suggest they are 100% risks to do with the legal and procurement-technical straightjacket within which we operate, not risks related to the quality of the outcome.&#xa0;If the Select Committee really wants to make a difference, it should recommend the wholesale rewriting of the PCRs.  I’m not for a moment suggesting a free for all should prevail – indeed procurement officers should be made responsible for absolutely ensuring that the highest standards of probity, integrity, fairness, openness and lawfulness prevail.  But the framework they should be operating within should be created by the people most affected by it, via the local democratic mechanisms that already exist.&#xa0;In the spirit of localism, why not let local councillors, mandated by the people, decide what standards they want suppliers to meet?  Why shouldn’t they be free to say if they want local businesses to be given special treatment, in the interests of local economic wellbeing?  There’d be downsides as well as up, but at the moment no one is empowered even to consider the matter, never mind construct local priorities and policies.  (Incidentally I don’t for a moment mean to reawaken the unacceptable spectre of ‘cosy deals’ between greedy councillors and fat cat businessmen – the highest standards, robustly audited and rigorously enforced must prevail!)&#xa0;There has been much press lately about LA’s needing to save money with some giving residents opportunity to make suggestions on how savings can be made which in my view helps to engage with residents. This could be taken a step further in terms of social, economic objectives perhaps offering residents the opportunity to express what they feel would be of benefit locally. I don’t believe that LA’s are particularly well organised to offer value for money. In many cases we are approached by user departments running their own procurement projects either on their own or via ESPO frameworks, what is worrying is that there are departments conducting their own procurement projects without even involving their procurement team, how can this happen?&#xa0;Planned and Preventative Maintenance (Cambridge City Council) 3005 let Sept 2010 – bidders were encouraged to consider social value issues and the winning bid included a commitment to employ a number of apprentices, based on contract turnover.  The project group included two tenant representatives who were involved in tender specification and evaluation.&#xa0;&#xa0;Question 1 is really for LA CPU’s to demonstrate value adds but I would say in response to the final sentence that Procurement Regs and the principles of fairness and transparency often work against forming any long term relationships with contractors. Add to this the hawkish nature of disgruntled contractors and any LA trying to develop such relationships would likely end up in court under anti competition charges.&#xa0;&#xa0;No, they don’t take sufficient advantage.  As if to contradict my own argument above, I think local authorities are far too precious about their own ‘essential’ local standards, especially when it comes to practical things like PQQ.  (“We only deal with suppliers who hold ISOXXX, so we can't possibly use your framework agreement” syndrome.)&#xa0;And what are we to make of Pro5?  A few years ago local government appeared to be getting its collaborative act together in the shape of Pro5.  But following complaints to the OFT there is always the risk that Local Authorities working together could be perceived as a potential abuse of a dominant market position.&#xa0;In my experience authorities do not take enough advantage of collaborative opportunities that are available to them. There are many frameworks that we have available which authorities utilise but often they request that we either conduct procurement projects for them specifically or do their own thing.&#xa0;Microgeneration is one of the few Pro5 ES&amp;WM frameworks we have.  We are currently engaged with Cambridgeshire CC to advise on the approach to the procurement of £30m of photo-voltaic devices.  &#xa0;31 local authorities are signed up to Framework 449 Pasta and Wrap solutions – good value for money. It’s hard for ESPO to always quantify the savings because half the time the authorities don’t get accurate MI from suppliers until they access the ESPO Framework.&#xa0;Questions 2 and 3 are good for us to wax lyrical about ESPO’s raison d’etre and also how we work with GPS and Pro5 and how much easier it would be for LA CPU’s to take advantage of collaborative opportunities if only they were all true participative members of such consortia. The same goes for accessing the skills etc – the centre of excellence of a PBO already has these skills. Similarly, true collaboration would require understanding of procurement expenditure and as frameworks progress, the PBO would be able to advise individual authorities of their individual spend patterns and behaviour via MI received thorough effective contract management. Insular protective approaches at the local level will only lead to the status quo – ineffective strategies, unknown value for money (not benchmarked) and poor market intelligence.It would be good to have sight of some of the LA responses to these questions as the easy way to demonstrate these would be by evidencing an active participation in PBO collaborations. Unfortunately not many could truthfully demonstrate this. &#xa0;&#xa0;See comments to question 1.&#xa0;Through effective stakeholder engagement. Also through understanding what it is they actually wish to achieve from the outset in terms of social value and defining a clear policy. In many cases local authorities do not know enough about particular markets so do not maximise potential savings when undertaking procurements. In my view utilising PBO’s more could help deliver more productive strategies. &#xa0;Often but not by working together for example as a&#xa0; Food Forum with ESPO the deficiencies get addressed e.g. outsourced procurement in LB Barnet. You may be aware that Capita are incumbent to LBB as a business partner pending the outcome of a High Court case where the residents of the Borough have objected to the outsourcing proposals – the Capita staff delivering the service &#xa0;will be based in the IOW and Cumbria – to the annoyance of local residents.  It has become apparent that a  lack of practical knowledge in how best to manage a suite of food contracts. This of course is due to the local authority not knowing how best to outsource the procurement function – &#xa0;Sometimes I feel as if ESPO should be on the Consultancy Framework ourselves ! When I was in LBB last week the Borough asked if ESPO could set up a formal arrangement with LBB as an alternative to Capita !– flattering but too much risk to ESPO.&#xa0;Questions 2 and 3 are good for us to wax lyrical about ESPO’s raison d’etre and also how we work with GPS and Pro5 and how much easier it would be for LA CPU’s to take advantage of collaborative opportunities if only they were all true participative members of such consortia. The same goes for accessing the skills etc – the centre of excellence of a PBO already has these skills. Similarly, true collaboration would require understanding of procurement expenditure and as frameworks progress, the PBO would be able to advise individual authorities of their individual spend patterns and behaviour via MI received through effective contract management. Insular protective approaches at the local level will only lead to the status quo – ineffective strategies, unknown value for money (not benchmarked) and poor market intelligence.It would be good to have sight of some of the LA responses to these questions as the easy way to demonstrate these would be by evidencing an active participation in PBO collaborations. Unfortunately not many could truthfully demonstrate this. &#xa0;&#xa0;Can't possibly speak in the generality about this.  But there are echoes here of the answer to question 1 – local authorities might well have a very good grasp of the things mentioned here, but the extent to which they can act accordingly without looking constantly over their shoulder, or even better, be possessed of clairvoyant faculties to help them foresee what flexibility they might need in their contractual arrangement in the future, and so avoid ending up in the High Court for failing to include every possibility when they wrote their OJEU notice.&#xa0;Typically when we undertake projects for authorities they do make reference to budgets and that if budgets are cut then this will potentially have an impact upon the contract throughout its life.&#xa0;As a Public Buying Organisation  our compliance processes help to ensure that risk and strategies are covered off. Our T&amp;C’s give some flexibility in changes to service budgets etc. &#xa0;&#xa0;IF Authorities utilised ESPO more then they would have effective arrangements available to them. &#xa0;Questions 5 &amp; 6 would be covered off for participating LA’s by PBO audit and governance.&#xa0;Checks and balances are in place in the form of effective procedures that require approval and sign-off at critical milestones of a procurement exercise.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;I could go on and on about this! There are too many instances where the authority is over specifying products and services. They think they need something far superior from what they actually do. Take wheeled bins for example, too many authorities want coloured bins made from virgin material with solid axles. If central government were to say to authorities you MUST purchase products made from recycled material, with hollow axles, in black with different coloured lids the savings would be tremendous. However in many cases procurers are influenced by some suppliers in the market and procure a product in excess of what is required costing £’s more. In terms of procurements being transparent I think if authorities adopt the approach we take then they would be fully accountable. However I have spent too much time advising procurers in the past that they need to do X to satisfy the regs only for them to do as they wish. &#xa0;RM958 Insurance framework (GPS/Pro5 collaboration) – the use of a reverse e-auction for the single broker Lot which secured savings of above 30% compared with tender prices.  &#xa0;Questions 5 &amp; 6 would be covered off for participating LA’s by PBO audit and governance.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;