&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]Written evidence from Leeds-Lancaster-Morecambe CRP (TIC 046)&#xa0;Some research was undertaken in 2006/07 on this service by the TAS Partnership, a transport consultancy; it was produced by Phillip Higgs, The TAS Partnership Ltd. Guildhall House, Guildhall St. Preston PR1 3NU (Tel 01772 204988). Some of their broad findings are incorporated into this response.&#xa0;Comments on the specific points:&#xa0;1) How do Government and local authorities identify demand for passenger transport in isolated communities (including rural and urban areas and island communities)?&#xa0;Population density may be lower but there would seem to be a good&#xa0;deal of suppressed demand both from residents and visitors; most have a car because public transport is not available at all times so often the marginal cost of an additional car journey is accepted rather than public transport. Any basic shopping or work based trips from stations along the line such as Wennington, Bentham, Clapham, Giggleswick, Long Preston, Hellfiield and Gargrave  are often not straight forward and often are constrained by the timings of the last journeys in the early evening, the last service from Leeds leaves at 16.47.  Those without a car are reliant on family or friends for when public transport is lacking. We feel that there is no doubt that a substantial degree of exclusion from public transport services exists in rural areas.&#xa0;It is really a case of until the public service is available that is suitable, people will not use the current less than helpful partial service; but as even this restricted service is not used the planners see no need to increase the service. Proper analysis needs to be made of what is required. However the service has seen continual year on year growth despite the current timetable shortcomings.&#xa0;TAS found that it was almost impossible to use the line for commuting to and from work because of the very early last train from Leeds (currently 16:47). It also felt that travelling for leisure trips especially when returning from Leeds were poor. Yet they noted a 49% increase in patronage from 1998 to 2007 and yearly reports by Northern Rail indicate that the usage continues to grow.&#xa0;Between Skipton and Morecambe 42,437 people lived within one kilometre of a station (2001 census data) with over 150,000 within five kilometres. TAS felt that there was a potential target market of 12,000 people for stations along the central part of the route. The population is ageing, especially at the Western end but up to 43% of the population in some areas is a potential commuter market if the service was geared to working patterns.&#xa0;2) To what extent are the needs of different groups of passengers (e.g. people with disabilities, older people, young people) taken into account in determining the provision of public transport to isolated communities?&#xa0;School runs and specialist services for pensioners and walkers apart there would often appear to be an assumption that rural people only require a basic daytime weekday service; the existing rural public transport network in some areas is a patchwork of accidental survivals.  Those who rely on public transport for work need a service that is consistent seven days a week as many industries are no longer confined to a traditional Monday – Friday working week. &#xa0;Integration of all forms of public transport services could be better developed - rail, stage carriage bus, community transport bus, demand responsive services so that all groups have a chance to access the public transport network; for those without passes, fares can also be expensive.&#xa0;&#xa0;3) What are the main challenges associated with providing better and more consistent bus and rail services to isolated communities? How can these challenges be overcome?&#xa0;Providing services in sparsely populated areas is expensive and government does not necessarily recognise this in its funding settlements to non-metro transport authorities; cross county boundary services can also be a source of problems as different counties can have different priorities in terms of providing 'optional' services; because of vastly varying traffic flows, different types of solutions are necessary for different routes/communities; there should however be core rail and stage carriage routes giving a full regular interval service seven days a week.&#xa0;&#xa0;The timetables for rural rail stations are rarely co-ordinated with bus services from surrounding villages and often the bus does not even stop near the station. TAS commented that bus services should complement rather than compete with the railway.&#xa0;Historic rail timetables are perpetuated in the PSR requirements, and the operators who are now shorn of their powers to adjust services themselves and are merely contractors providing these specified services. Such services are often totally out of focus of modern needs (commuting, shopping, leisure). &#xa0;County Councils who are the area transport authorities seem to be remote from the local parish and town councils; even District Councils in some cases with minimal, if any, consultation. There needs to be liaison between all levels of Local Government and the Rail and Bus industry together with User Groups and CRPs.&#xa0;The CRP for Leeds-Morecambe already comprises representatives from various levels of authorities as well as Northern Rail, Network Rail and voluntary groups thus making it a useful existing body for this detailed work to be played out.But there is a need for all participants to be flexible where changes can be made without much cost and a local usable service provided.&#xa0;Car parking at many rural stations is small or non existent (mainly due to land sell off) provision should be encouraged as this allows access from surrounding villages to public transport instead of the need to drive into town for work, shopping etc with the traffic and parking problems involved.&#xa0;&#xa0;4) How effectively do Community Transport services address the needs of passengers in isolated communities? How could Community Transport be improved?&#xa0;A lot of good work has been done in this area but lack of long term core funding, and of coordinated integration and marketing strategies has not helped in fulfilling the full potential of this mode. Three year funding, for example, is too short to allow investment in capital projects which may take longer to achieve payback. This argument has also been a criticism of short duration Rail franchises. &#xa0;There needs to be funding for at least seven years, or ten to allow more imaginative solutions to be tried with the chance of being able to become revenue neutral over the full period.&#xa0;5) To what extent should passengers in isolated communities be expected to rely on taxis and other demand-responsive transport services?&#xa0;These forms of transport need to play their part and may be the only solution in some isolated areas but should not replace regular core services as in rural areas they will restrict travel opportunities. Even community based demand-responsive services can be expensive compared with scheduled services and thus this disadvantages people living in such areas compared to those in urban areas who have much lower transport costs.&#xa0;6) What are the main challenges associated with funding transport services in isolated communities? How can these services be made more affordable?&#xa0;Community rail partnerships and community bus services have proved their worth in reducing the costs of rural transport even where their activities have been largely directed towards increasing revenue - marketing and community involvement strategies have paid dividends in tapping into the suppressed demand mentioned above; the value of improved rural services feeding into national trunk/cross country services needs also to be recognised; for rail, Network Rail have been examining ways of providing cheaper alternative traction options for rural lines. &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;TAS noted that the pricing of tickets offered good value compared to car and bus.&#xa0;Both TPE and Virgin offer heavily discounted advance tickets while Northern Rail do not do so on this line. This has the effect of diverting customers from this cross-country rural route which has capacity onto overcrowded longer distance services operated via Preston &amp; Manchester. With better promotion the demand could rise and thus lead to improved services in the longer term.&#xa0;TAS did notice that some of the utilisation of rolling stock was inefficient and felt that with better diagramming the service could be enhanced without needing additional stock, although this would need a change of practices in the staffing. At present it is staffed only by crews from Skipton which partly explain the present nature of the service.&#xa0;This illustrates that more creative thinking is required bringing together all parties and accepting that changes may be needed in order to achieve the maximum utility for those in isolated communities.&#xa0;&#xa0;The local market of itself may be too small to justify a higher frequency service so needs to be linked to developing the route as an alternative Trans Pennine service. Question1 also referred to suburban areas. This is becoming a serious problem, especially in the Aire Valley, and nearer to Lancaster. Roads are jammed and old suburban stations were swept aside from the 1960s onwards as main line services grew; replacement of such now being difficult as lines have been reduced while paths and speed of Intercity routes have grown in importance. Possible areas to explore should include restoring these stations (as has happened in the Aire Valley) nearer Lancaster perhaps by the provision of loops, as used on the continent. It may be more four line tracks need to be restored where lifted. The use of Tram/Trains should be encouraged which can use the road area to skirt blockages and to serve town centres and use track adjacent to the railway or disused lines where space exists to install this.&#xa0;It is also of interest that one of the questionable approaches adopted in the Beeching report was to ignore the effect of feeder services into the wider rail network. While taken on its own a service such as the Leeds-Lancaster-Morecambe may have questions about economic benefits it needs to be seen in the context of a supporting route to the more principal East and West Coast routes – linking both of these main arterial rail trunks.&#xa0;August 2013 &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;