&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Forever Fuels Ltd (HOT11)]]]Forever Fuels (FF) is a leading supplier of high-grade wood pellets to end users in the UK. We are one of four suppliers to have achieved accreditation as a trader under the European wood-pellet accreditation scheme, ENplus. We have a national network of a dozen depots and 20 specialist trucks dedicated to the distribution and blown delivery of sustainable, virgin-fibre, A1-grade wood pellets. We have been leading the market for specialist blown deliveries of wood pellets to continental standards since 2007.Forever Fuels is part of the Summerleaze (SLZ) group. SLZ has been investing in renewables for over 30 years. We have a successful track record of identifying immature technologies with genuine commercial potential, and of bringing them to profitable maturity. We have been actively involved in policy since before the privatisation of the CEGB, both in our own right and as founder members of organisations such as the Association of Independent Electricity Producers (predecessor of the AEP and EnergyUK) and of Green Power Producers (which laid the foundations for the establishment of the Renewable Power Association, later to become the Renewable Energy Association).I chair the Renewable Energy Association’s (REA’s) Biomass Heat group, but the following submission is on behalf of Forever Fuels, and does not represent the views of the REA Biomass Heat group.These factors may not be coincidental. Reductions in demand seem to be largely the unintended consequence of energy policies that (a) embed the competitive advantages (and pricing power) of the Big Six energy companies, and (b) impose costs on customers that are not always proportionate to the benefit. Demand reductions appear to have less to do with the intended effects of government policy. The increase in the number of deaths resulting from cold weather suggests that the reduction in demand is attributable less to improvements in efficiency than to reductions in comfort, thanks to increasing discrepancies between costs and many people’s ability to pay. The Government may not want to take credit for this reduction in demand.The Government’s intended approach can be characterised as “supply-push”, while the unintended effect can be characterised as “demand-pull”. Demand reduction through “supply-push” is like pushing on a piece of string. One should expect a higher standard to be demanded if efficiency improvements are commissioned by the person that buys the energy than if they are installed to meet the targets of the company that sells the energy. “Demand-pull” driven by high energy prices should result in less of a Rebound Effect, than “supply-push” driven by redistributed costs of installation.If “demand-pull” were the deliberate result of government policy to internalise externalities through energy taxes (e.g. carbon taxes and fossil-fuel taxes, Scandinavian-style), the Government would have a substantial source of revenue with which to assist the most vulnerable households and to cut taxes that create a greater drag on the economy (e.g. taxes on employment and productivity). It would also encourage the most cost-effective responses to the price incentive in each circumstance, whereas the Government’s approach of targeted subsidy is necessitated largely by their desire to encourage projects that are currently less cost-effective.Unintentional “demand-pull” combined with intentional “supply-push” is the worst of all worlds. High prices go partly to subsidising uneconomic technologies and partly to increased profits for the energy oligopoly. Customers and taxpayers see little gain to accompany the pain, and neither do businesses who are not allied to the Big Six.See above. The wrong kind of progress, from the wrong kind of policy.Unlike the biomass power industry, the biomass heat industry provisionally supports DECC’s efforts to look more closely at the potential impacts of increased demand for biomass, and the associated intensification of production. DECC are asking legitimate questions, and need assistance from the renewables and forestry industries, to make the assumptions in their models as realistic as possible. That engagement is at an early stage. On the basis of a recent presentation, DECC’s Biomass Emissions and Counterfactuals (BEaC) model needs ignificant refinements in the embedded assumptions. Forever Fuels looks forward to assisting that refinement, and will encourage other members of the industry to do the same.Nevertheless, the outline is clear, even if the detail is not. Wood is a scarce resource. There is a limit to the amount that can be produced sustainably. Competing demand for that sustainable resource means that an increased use for biomass may result in reduced availability for other uses. Intensification of production to increase the available resource may have significant consequences for the carbon stock in the short- to medium-term (known as the “carbon debt” problem).It is important to understand that the often-encountered, simplistic explanation of the “carbon debt” problem is simply wrong. DECC’s BEaC model is looking into the genuine issue rather than the simplistic fallacy. Distinguishing between the fallacy and the genuine issue has significant implications for policy.The fallacy compares the carbon released by burning the biomass harvested from an area with the amount of carbon that is absorbed by regrowth on that area. By this comparison, the concentration of carbon in the atmosphere may be increased in the medium-term. If we are worried about climate-change tipping points, then the short-term increase appears significant.The fallacy lies in treating this on a temporal rather than a spatial basis. The argument assumes that only the trees that regrow on the felled land will absorb the carbon that is emitted initially. That is not how forestry works. Forests are harvested in rotation. If the rotation is at a sustainable rate, the amount of carbon released from the harvested land each year is equal to the amount of carbon absorbed by the rest of the land that is left to grow that year. There is no short-term increase unless the forest is harvested unsustainably.DECC’s BEaC model considers a more subtle question: what if the rate of harvesting is increased to meet an increased demand for biomass? The model relies on work that indicates that this can result in a carbon increase in the atmosphere and reduction on the land. In effect, accelerated harvesting increases the carbon footprint of the marginal volume of biomass that is produced through the acceleration. In cases of strong acceleration, this increase may be so significant that this marginal volume cannot be considered sustainable from a carbon perspective.The significance of the distinction between the genuine and fallacious issue is that the fallacy could imply that there is a problem with all biomass that is not produced on short rotation, whereas understanding the genuine issue clarifies that the problem is with the marginal volume that might be produced through intensification above the sustainable rate of production. Under the fallacy, shortening the rotation cycle reduces the problem. In reality, shortening the rotation cycle can be the cause of the problem.&#xa0;We support DECC’s efforts to refine the Government’s sustainability considerations. This work should be carried out and used scientifically, and not mis-used to justify false generalisations, as some environmental NGOs have done.The greatest (perhaps insuperable) challenge for DECC’s BEaC model, is to move from testing scenarios to quantifying the scale and probability of those scenarios. Without that, the model is primarily of illustrative value.The most significant factor highlighted by BEaC that may need incorporating into sustainability guidelines, is the question of “carbon debt”. This could be incorporated by asking forest managers to supply three pieces of information annually for the area of land under their management:This information should be easily accessible to forest managers. It allows for simple calculation of the real “carbon debt” (i.e. calculated on a spatial rather than a temporal basis). This would also broadly take account of the “counterfactual use” issue, by allowing the benefits of non-energy uses to be taken into account in the calculation.We have put this suggestion to DECC and look forward to continuing the discussion.Local air quality rules are the appropriate way to deal with the varying circumstances against which emissions have to be considered. The failure of some urban areas to meet air quality limits, when there are few biomass boilers or CHP units in those areas, demonstrates that the problem lies elsewhere, particularly with vehicle emissions.Heat is an inherently local product. Distribution losses are too great to transport heat over long distances. It is also an on-demand product. Storage losses limit the length of time that it is practical to store heat.Some people would like to work round this, and the air-quality issues, by using electricity to transport the energy used to produce heat. This ignores the many ways in which electricity is an unsuitable heating fuel.The solution is to use the appropriate technology in the appropriate location to produce combined heat and power in a way that has acceptable impacts on air quality. Some objections to CHP could be countered by combining CHP, low-temperature district heating, and basic heat pumps to upgrade the distributed heat.Direct gas heating is a superior option to centralised generation and heat pumps, for the reasons explained above.Because the incentives are skewed to disadvantage them. The cost of installing CHP and district heating has to be recovered from the value of the heat. It has been UK government policy for decades to keep heat as cheap as possible (e.g. special VAT rates and profligate use of our North-Sea gas reserves). There is therefore little value in efficiency.Don’t promote different forms of domestic heating solutions. Internalise the externalities and let the market decide which forms are most suitable in each circumstance. The cost of any government winner-picking is economic inefficiency and capital destruction. Scrap most of our energy interventions, and replace them with a carbon tax and fossil-fuel tax.No. The government should take fewer specific actions across the board. It is doing quite enough damage already.Because heat pumps are not a suitable technology for the majority of heating requirements in the UK. We have an inefficient stock of buildings (because heat is cheap). Heat pumps are primarily suitable for high-efficiency new-build properties, and we don’t build enough new buildings to a suitable standard. The majority of our properties for the next 50 years will not be suitable for heat pumps.There are also significant questions about their real-world as opposed to their theoretical efficiency.We still don’t know enough of the details, in particular the budget and the budget-control mechanism. The sector has by far the largest potential, so we must expect that efforts will be made to constrain that potential through “idiosyncrasies” in the implementation.Thermal storage is not a useful method to balance energy demand annually. The cost of a system that would buffer heat without excessive losses for a week, let alone a year, would far exceed the benefits of trying to do so.Many properties already use diurnal thermal storage. Straightforward engineering requirements drive its deployment wherever the heat-source cannot be switched on and off immediately. All that the government need do additionally is to remove the market-skewing mechanisms that keep the value of heat relatively low compared to other forms of energy, so that larger capacity buffers may be justified where they improve the overall efficiency of the heating system.September 2013&#xa0; http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/thousands-of-unexplained-and-unexpected-deaths-among-elderly-revealed-in-leaked-government-analysis-8731985.html Energy &amp; Climate Change Committee, 5th Report - Energy Prices, Profits and Poverty (July 2013) DECC, Energy Consumption in the UK (July 2013), https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/energy-consumption-in-the-uk http://www.cityam.com/article/isn-t-recovery-we-expected-we-shouldn-t-write-it-entirely &amp; http://www.themanufacturer.com/articles/growth-forecasts-raised-but-manufacturing-will-still-shrink-in-2013/ http://www.building.co.uk/news/signed-green-deal-plans-rise-to-36/5058061.article &amp; http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-23766117 http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/energy/10200859/ScottishPower-blames-government-energy-efficiency-schemes-for-rising-costs.html http://www.cityam.com/article/pensions-being-crushed-low-interest-rates This is a complex factor, because increased production of wood for other uses may increase the resource available for biomass, because of the increased availability of by-product. The reverse (reduced production for other uses resulting in reduced resource for biomass) can also occur, but does not always apply. &#xa0;Reduced demand for other uses may make an increased proportion of the sustainable wood resource available for biomass without adverse consequences in other industries. It may be difficult to distinguish whether reduced volumes in other uses are because of displacement by biomass or because of a natural reduction in demand (e.g. a permanent reduction in demand for pulp because of the replacement of some paper by electronic documents). &#xa0;Would the alternative uses have been of greater social and environmental benefit than the use of the resource for energy? Perhaps the wood could have been used for a purpose that would have a significant environmental benefit (e.g. for production of particleboard that displaces concrete and steel), but that does not mean that it would have been used for that purpose. Quantifying the proportion of biomass that would otherwise have been used for particleboard, and the proportion of that particleboard that would have displaced concrete and steel is probably impossible. It involves the complex relations of supply, demand, prices and elasticities across many products and several industries and unpredictable perturbations in those relations. These are probably not computable (see e.g. the work of Prof. Velupillai on computable economics) and are certainly not static. Rather, they have to be continuously discovered in a market. &#xa0;That is another reason why it is important to internalise externalities rather than to subsidise technologies on the basis of estimated need and subjective assessment of merit and potential. With internalised externalities and no other subsidies, the resource can be allocated efficiently by markets. If the market is distorted by subsidies that exceed the value of the externalities, the resource will be allocated inefficiently by markets. This is complex. On land without a substantial land-based carbon stock and where displacing the existing use will not have significant counterfactual consequences, planting short-rotation energy crops can have a strong carbon benefit. The problem occurs with shortening the rotation on land where there is a significant land-based carbon stock (e.g. a forest).&#xa0;This complexity can produce counter-intuitive conclusions. One conclusion that has surprised the industry is that bringing unmanaged broadleaf forests into active management has a worse carbon footprint than burning coal. This was a major plank of the Government and the Forestry Commission’s plan to increase biomass production in the UK.&#xa0;The reason is that many common broadleaf species have long natural lifecycles (hundreds of years). Established broadleaf forests embody a substantial stock of carbon, and their sustainable rate of production is a slow harvesting cycle (a fraction of a percent of the resource each year).&#xa0;Softwoods generally regrow relatively fast and have a relatively short lifecycle (depending on the location and climate). They will tend to die or be vulnerable to wind-blow once they reach a relatively young age of maturity. Their sustainable harvesting cycle is therefore measured in decades, as opposed to centuries for many broadleafs. That (and the greater suitability of the product for certain purposes such as pulp) is why softwoods tend to be planted in the “factory forests” that produce most of our wood products.&#xa0;This is not the only reason why the plan was a mistake. The Government and the Forestry Commission also misunderstood what many of the private owners of those forests wanted from their properties, and their willingness to convert them into biomass factories. &#xa0;Although they identified the wrong resource, that does not mean that the potential for biomass is limited. It means that it needs to come from more sustainable sources, e.g. softwood plantations. The native UK resource of sustainable biomass is probably less than estimated by the Government, but (a) it is not insignificant, and (b) there is more potential for imports of sustainable biomass for the heat market than the Government had allowed. &#xa0;There is no reason why heat should use only native biomass and imports should be reserved for power-generation. The conversion efficiency of heat production is so much better than the conversion efficiency of power production that the carbon footprint of imported biomass will be significantly lower if used for heat than for power. In some cases, fuel that is not sustainable for power is sustainable for heat, because of the difference in the conversion efficiencies.&#xa0; http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/analysis/2286031/decc-scientist-takes-green-groups-to-task-over-biomass-claims