&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[Jenny ]]]

[[[E ]]]

[[[Marsden (WSC025)]]]

[[[1. Background]]]

[[[:]]] I work as a registered Healthcare scientist within a Radiation Physics department supporting Oncology and Radiotherapy Services. I am aware that my professional body is also preparing a response to this consultation but I would like to take this opportunity to submit evidence because it affects me directly at this very moment. I recently started a family and, up until then, progressed through my STEM career for over 15 years with the minimum of gender related issues. I truly believed that there were no boundaries for women carving out a career in science. The next step for me would be a more senior role, such as a department deputy or even leading a small department. Higher study in the form of a specialised PhD is another option.2. However, I am now acutely aware of the gender issues facing me as a new mother in the workplace. It appears I have a stark choice between promotion and spending time in the week with my children. The two appear mutually exclusive at the moment whilst my children are young and particularly as I have chosen to breastfeed. It is very difficult to demonstrate dedication towards work to managers, in terms of working long non standard hours, as well as to the family.3. Why do numbers of women in STEM academic careers decline further up the career ladder? I present my thoughts and experiences to the committee in the hope that it will encourage discussion on some of the issues I have been exploring whilst trying to resolve my own personal question; Do I want to be a Scientist in a very Senior Role? &#xa0;

[[[4]]]

[[[.]]]

[[[ Executive ]]]

[[[Summary]]]:

[[[5]]]

[[[. ]]]

[[[Discussion: ]]]It is generally assumed that women in science all want to achieve the highest position they can. I would like to dispute this claim. Women have to think very carefully about the choice they make when perusing senior roles and weigh up a number of different conflicting demands. I expect I am one of the women in the statistics who have failed to take up a top role. My choice now is to continue in my current role, in effect halting my career rise. It is less of a ‘leaky pipe’ and more of a ‘boggy hill climb’ akin to the ‘sticky floor’ which many other career women face in other professions. Some women just prefer the view from the level they have reached!6. Girls entering the world of work are getting married or forming long term relationships and having children later. Women who have reached a reasonable position are older and may care for both children and parents. One advantage of settling down later is that women may be receiving higher salaries, but that in turn may present a problem because they may well become the main breadwinner for the household. If the woman’s job is the main or only source of family income, the risk of pursuing high roles by moving around the country on consecutive short term contracts or taking time out to study to further advance may be perceived as far too high. Job security at the moment is also in question so many people are looking to stabilise their work lives rather than move on to temporary or short fixed term contracts. This would have been a way of progressing up the career ladder in previous years, or when there were no other responsibilities to consider except for oneself. Mobility to follow roles around the country is also perceived to be reduced once family life is established. I think this option is still open for those with fewer ties, male or female, who are willing to move around to where the leading jobs are situated.7. Child care, flexible working and return to work from maternity leave are governed by legislation to protect women having children in the workplace, but the application of this legislation to the policies and procedures within workplaces varies. The culture of long working hours and expectation of availability outside standard working hours is still strong, especially in relation to more senior grades, where many believe it is not possible to perform these roles part time. When women consider applying for promotion they must weigh up the demands on their time with the higher salary and status. Often the choice, especially when children are young, is to put off the promotion in favour of more family friendly working hours which appear to be easier to gain at the lower roles. Whilst it is important to promote girls in STEM it is also important to ensure that people have personal choice. I also would like to make the point that this applies to men who chose to have more family friendly work hours and is not distinct from the issue with women. It may be that the stereotypical role of the mother at home prevails, but also, as women are consciously choosing to have children and have more control over when to do it, many would like to have some time with them, especially in the early years.8. Flexible working policies do exist but they are not always supported, on the ground, for higher roles. Choices between staying in current positions (for example, I already work full time on week days with the occasional pre-planned evening shift) and going for a more senior post where the expectation would be to work beyond a regular working week. In practice this would mean seeing less of my children and having to find, costly, childcare. As a specialist in my role, at an already quite senior grade, there are no other staff who can share my responsibilities or workload so job share opportunities are also not possible. Senior roles often involve more managerial aspects than ‘doing’ science. It may not be very appealing to take on the burden of managing a department when one is often also managing the home or children at the same time. In some ways this may be a success story for women in STEM; that they are choosing to pursue roles which involve the study or application of science rather than managing the people that do it. Although it is a right to apply for flexible working it is not a right to be given it. Applications for condensed hours or four day weeks do not seem to be granted easily in my experience. There is an odd  dichotomy here as once a person is in a senior role they may have more autonomy to arrange their work and office hours as they see fit (provided it get completed, of course) so surprisingly this can be an informal route to flexible working. I expect many women would not feel confident planning to exploit this option prior to them being in post and therefore if a job was not advertised with flexible working they may not consider applying.Financially the cost of childcare is huge. Full time childcare can be as much as a quarter of a salary of £50k. The equations do not balance and although I am personally aware this situation should only last a few years and that it should be feasible for me to catch up in the long run, it means that I cannot consider applying for the top roles within my organisation at the moment. It is possible that this realisation comes to other STEM mothers but they decide to continue in their lower roles rather than seek promotion and this then continues for the rest of their working lives. Improved change planning and role development could be successful here.9. Certainly the country has seen a rise in working mothers however this report also demonstrates that between 66.5% of mothers and 67.3% of women without dependent children were in work. Women are also having children later with more women aged 35-49 with pre-school children.  So what are the other women doing? And what proportion of these could be skilled STEM advocates? My professional body, the IPEM, have some data on this question.10. If we now assume female and male applicants both apply for the top posts, what could be affecting women being employed? The interviewers have expectations of the incumbent, which may be closely related to their own work and life experiences. If these are all men (or women) who have succeeded by putting in many hours and who do not have families, it is hard for them to appreciate that a mother or carer can do just as a good a job within the working week. I was successful at an interview for a deputy head job elsewhere where the panel consisted of a female head with a family. I was subsequently told that this level of role would not have been accessible to me within my current workplace. I am not supportive of women only shortlists but having at least one woman, or a person experienced with flexible working and successful work/life balance, on the interview panel for senior jobs would, I believe, be massively beneficial. It is worth pointing out that some fathers and men could also suffer from this inequality if they are the main carer, (especially with the change in legislation governing sharing paternity and maternity leave or adoption leave). For me, the NHS Higher Specialist Scientific Training programme could be a way into the top roles in the country but it is expected to be available for only a small percentage of the workforce. I wonder if there is a place for positive discrimination or at least, fewer perceived boundaries and encouragement for women applying? It is my belief that if a person is governing an organisation then they should be representative of the staff they are governing (i.e. a balance and mix of genders, races and life experiences) but if they are managing services then they should be the best people for the job, regardless of gender. The difficulty comes when the senior role is a mixture of both.11. Advertising successful role models within science should be encouraged. This is not always achieved successfully because these women often appear as super-women and cannot be related to. It is not possible for the average STEM career women to have a live in nanny, au pair or a stay at home partner for example! Promoting the long haul of a career rather than the short term job prospects should be encouraged by professional bodies and the government. This is even more important as the age of retirement increases. A woman may go through many and varying roles with different working patterns during her working life and this is to be encouraged.12. With regard to universities and Higher Education Institutions retaining women graduates and PhD students, this could be encouraged by the use of clear avenues into work. For example, by tying a higher degree to a work pathway or company who encourage flexible working, STEM subjects could be made tailored for companies who require specialist post graduates, thereby giving them access to the highest calibre of candidates. On completion of the degree the transition to work could be made with the knowledge that flexible working and maternity/paternity leave arrangements will not only be considered but are encouraged for a healthy work/life balance. It is often highly frowned upon and discouraged to plan any significant life event during higher degree studies. For one year courses such as MSc, this might be understandable, but for three year PhDs, training schemes and longer or part time courses it is highly unlikely that a major life event won’t happen during that time. Higher Education Institutions must make provision for what might happen if women chose this time to start a family. How can they come back into their degree, is there provision for childcare on site for them to continue their studies, how long can they extend for? I realise that this is already done on an individual basis but perhaps a clear policy might help girls or women chose their higher education institution more carefully.13. What role should the Government have in encouraging the retention of women in academic STEM careers? The Government should promote career planning that includes personal goals as well as professional achievements. Implementation of family friendly policies at work, not just the presence of a policy should be commended. Financial rewards for companies who actively promote flexible working could be considered.I have no conflicts of interest in relation to this inquiry. I am a member of the Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine who have also provided evidence for this inquiry.August 2013&#xa0;&#xa0; IPPR Report on ‘The Sandwich Generation: Older Women Balancing Work and Care Ref: http://www.ippr.org/images/media/files/publication/2013/08/sandwich-generation-August2013_11168_11168.pdf) Office for National Statistics Report ‘Mothers in the Labour Market’, March 2011Ref: http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171776_234036.pdf Not yet fully developed at http://www.nhscareers.nhs.uk/explore-by-career/healthcare-science/training/nhs-higher-specialist-scientific-training-(hsst)/