&#xa0;The Energy Technologies Institute (ETI), a public-private partnership between global energy and engineering firms and the UK Government, believes that CCS will be a critical part of any affordable, secure and sustainable low carbon UK energy system in the future.  However, it is important that the right steps are taken to ensure the cost of carbon reductions are affordable in the context of sustaining UK economic growth and industrial development.CCS may be the single, most cost effective lever for reducing UK greenhouse gas emissions.  Its potential, because of its flexibility of use, extends beyond the electricity sector and is central to a national strategy to meet carbon targets cost-effectively by: ETI’s analysis of the UK energy system shows that deploying CCS to its full potential can reduce the cost of meeting carbon targets by up to 1% of GDP (compared to the costs if no CCS were deployed) – equivalent to a saving of around £1000 on average household bills for energy and transport costs in 2050.  These savings arise because spending on more expensive alternatives for cutting emissions would be avoided.The key technologies needed to deploy CCS (CO2 capture, compression, pipelines and geological injection and storage) have been successfully applied in a range of contexts.  The next step is to assemble and deploy these proven components at scale in a number of full chain projects.  We believe the technical challenges are surmountable in engineering terms, but require the strategic will and investment to de-risk, drive down costs and build a network of CO2 transport and storage infrastructure.CCS will require upfront investment to create strategic infrastructure and prove storage sites, so the costs for early projects are likely to be high when measured on a simple £ per MWh basis.  This does not mean CCS is uncompetitive.  Our work suggests that net benefits (in terms of savings compared to implementing more expensive alternatives) start to flow by the late 2020s, if the UK deploys CCS effectively.&#xa0;Our work shows that the total investment out to 2050 is estimated at around £60 to £80 billion on capture, transportation, storage plant and infrastructure.  This scale of investment is significant, but deliverable within a supportive policy environment, and would quickly start to yield returns, in the form of avoided decarbonisation costs, job creation and safeguarding the position of key industries in the UK.    It is challenging to deploy CCS in a market economy.  It requires large scale investment in complex new value chains, the returns on which are entirely dependent on long term policy certainty.  Attracting the private investment needed to develop the sector will depend on creating confidence that it will command strategic support from policy-makers.There are three fundamental approaches to capturing CO2 from fossil-fuelled power generation: We believe IGCC has significant potential for the future, because of its performance and the opportunity to produce hydrogen as an energy vector.

[[[C]]]

[[[ompression]]] and 

[[[transport]]] of CO2 represents relatively mature technology, with significant experience in Enhanced Oil Recovery applications in North America.  

[[[Storage]]] in a UK setting will be offshore in depleted oil and gas reservoirs and saline aquifers.  Significant work is required to fully appraise storage sites before CO2 storage takes place.  ETI has completed an assessment of UK storage appraisal prospects and the results of this are now available under license from the Crown Estate and BGS – at www.CO2Stored.co.uk.  ETI have also co-funded the UK’s first saline aquifer appraisal drilling project with National Grid.ETI have announced over £50m of CCS technology projects.  In addition to the four mentioned above we are investing in development of measurement, monitoring and verification techniques for offshore storage sites and desk top tools and studies for assessing and designing CCS systems.ETI has created an internationally peer reviewed modelling capability for the UK energy system known as ESME – the Energy System Modelling Environment.  This allows us to model the UK’s pathway to decarbonisation by 2050 under a range of scenarios, taking into account the underlying costs, engineering properties and inter-dependencies of key energy technologies.  This work robustly demonstrates that taking a system-wide approach substantially reduces the economic cost of decarbonisation. Our modelling points to a critical role for CCS both within and outside the electricity sector.  It suggests that if we do not successfully develop CCS in the UK, the annual cost of meeting carbon targets is likely to increase by over 1% of GDP by 2050.  It also highlights the potential economic benefit of applying CCS in combination with biomass, as a means of generating negative carbon emissions.  This would make it possible to meet carbon budgets and continue using fossil fuels in some applications where low carbon alternatives are particularly costly. A coherent strategy for developing CCS means taking account of the costs and benefits across the entire energy sector.  The electricity sector is the obvious starting point for developing CCS, as it is least exposed to international trade, can demonstrate and de-risk the full value chain at scale and through EMR has a reward mechanism available. However, our work also points clearly to the longer term importance of CCS in industrial and biomass applications – where it is possible to maximise the impact of resources by taking account of these broader decarbonisation benefits in decisions on contract pricing, allocation and contract design.  A substantial reduction in the cost of the overall national energy system (1% of GDP by 2050) is likely to be the most important benefit to the UK economy.  Spending on energy currently represents about 9% of GDP.  Containing this cost burden, for both industry and consumers by deploying CCS to deliver low carbon energy cost-effectively, would have a major impact on national economic competitiveness and help to generate and safeguard jobs.  We have commissioned work to assess the scale of the wider economic benefits associated with deployment of CCS.   A number of studies have also assessed the direct economic impact of CCS projects, on regional employment and value added, often in challenged regional economies.  The creation of a significant new CCS sector would create new employment opportunities and enable the UK to build exportable skills (e.g. particularly in established strengths such as process and offshore engineering) and expertise relevant to an emerging global CCS industry.  The CCS Technology Innovation Needs Assessment produced by the Low Carbon Innovation Coordination Group estimates innovation in CCS can help create a UK industry with the potential to contribute further economic value of £3-16bn to 2050.The development of CCS could also prolong the life of UK oil fields, through the application of captured CO2 in enhanced oil recovery and there could be the potential to re-use some existing North Sea oil and gas infrastructure (e.g. platforms or pipelines) enabling a significant deferral of expensive decommissioning obligations.  Our initial estimates show there is enough storage capacity under UK waters to offer the potential to provide storage not just for the UK but for other European countries without a similar resource.  CCS also offers the only route to directly address emissions from some key high emitting industries which would help the UK remain an attractive location and maintain employment in industrial sectors such as refining, in future decades, as carbon prices become a growing part of their cost base.CCS offers a unique potential to enable a genuinely economically viable transition to a low carbon economy.  But its strategic characteristics (large-scale, complex new value chains, dependence on policy for returns, its cost structure with economies of scale and scope, and the long-term nature of risks and liabilities) mean there are a range of barriers and challenges that need to be overcome.  These include:&#xa0;There are safety issues associated with any form of pressurised gas system and CCS is no different.These safety issues can in part be reduced through site selection.  Offshore storage of CO2 minimises the impact of any leakage from a store or the offshore pipeline and the selection of onshore pipeline routes needs to consider the potential impact of a containment failure. The plant and pipeline operators should be responsible for the safety of their operation which should be subject to regulation and planning approvals.In Norway and Algeria, CCS has been applied to high CO2 gas field developments for many years and similar projects are under development elsewhere, including the Gorgon gas field in Australia.  These developments are typically mandated by the field development plan approval process, either by the operating companies own standards or national or state legislation.  CCS has also played an integral role in onshore Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) in the USA.   Other countries are developing technologies and pursuing commercial scale demonstration of CCS in the power and industrial sectors.  None are yet operational, although the Boundary Dam project in Canada is nearing completion.  China has committed to cutting the carbon intensity of its economy and has launched an experimental, cap-and-trade pilot programme.  Recent press coverage suggests that China may commit to cap its emissions by 2016, which would represent a major escalation of commitment, and the government has ordered firms in heavy-polluting industries to cut emissions by 30% by 2017.  In April 2013, the National Development and Reform Commission detailed the way in which China would promote CCS pilot and demonstration programmes as an important task in China’s 12th Five–Year greenhouse gas control plan. The CCS Roadmap set out at a high level the steps needed to enable CCS deployment in the UK.  However, there have been delays in delivering the roadmap, notably in the CCS Commercialisation programme.  ETI’s work on private sector financing suggest there is considerable scepticism about the UK’s long term commitment to carbon targets.  Industry and investors are looking towards Government to demonstrate a long term commitment to CCS and to provide further details of how it will do so.  Emerging economies are likely to remain dependent on fossil fuels use for decades to come, and CCS is vital to enable these economies to continue to grow while containing emissions. The International Energy Agency highlighted the importance of CCS in its Energy Technology Perspectives 2012 when it stated that “CCS is the only technology on the horizon today that would allow industrial sectors (such as iron and steel, cement and natural gas processing) to meet deep emissions reduction goals.”The UK is particularly well-placed to play a leading role in developing CCS due to:ETI modelling suggests that if CCS is not successfully developed in the UK, the annual cost of meeting carbon targets is likely to increase by 1% of GDP by 2050.  This impact is felt across all sectors.Our modelling suggests that:

[[[In the transport sector]]] this will require the abolition of liquid fuels and replacing the entire car fleet with zero carbon vehicles (electric and hydrogen), which would be extremely costly and difficult.  With CCS introduced, approximately half the fleet could remain liquid fuelled with the remainder plug-in hybrid, with increasing efficiencies and use of biofuel blends.  Infrastructure investments would be more limited and also incremental, as the transition progresses.  

[[[In the buildings sector]]] no gas would be permissible for home heating and all buildings would need to be retrofitted with zero carbon technologies such as heat pumps, district heating (but not gas fired) or biomass boilers.  With CCS, gas boilers could be retained in difficult to retrofit houses, or for use in retrofitted houses during peak demand periods during cold weather snaps and if the electricity supply is reduced due to intermittency of renewables.The impact in both the buildings and transport sector would increase the peak demand for 

[[[electricity ]]]sharply and this increase would have to be met from a combination of nuclear and renewables.  Because of the intermittency of renewables, and the possibility that peak demand from both the buildings and transport sectors coincides with low supply from renewables, considerable back up supply would be needed.  Overall, the impact on the electricity sector is that without CCS the required total installed UK generation capacity is increased by more than 50% higher.  September 2013&#xa0;