&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, The University of Manchester (CCS13)]]]All views contained within this submission are attributable to the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of other researchers from the wider Tyndall Centre or University of Manchester. Our research activity that has contributed to this submission has predominantly been funded by the EPSRC and National Grid. No other interests are declared.The Tyndall Centre at University of Manchester has conducted a number of research projects both directly and indirectly relevant to this inquiry. This submission presents an overview of research on three topics, namely; i) public responses to CCS technology, and ii) the performance of CCS in relation to emissions budgets. Our conclusions drawn from these research areas are structured according to the questions specified in the terms of the inquiry rather than by topic.What are the main barriers (e.g. economic, political, regulatory, scientific and social) to developing large-scale integrated CCS projects in the UK and internationally? How can they be overcome? &#xa0;&#xa0;What are the consequences of failing to develop CCS and what alternatives are available for decarbonisation if CCS fails?&#xa0;

[[[References]]]Anderson, K., Bows, A., 2011. Beyond 'dangerous' climate change: emission scenarios for a new world. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society a-Mathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences 369, 20-44.DECC, 2010. Pathways for 2050. Department of Energy and Climate Change, London.Hammond, Geoffrey P., Howard, Hayley R., Jones, Craig I. (2013). The energy and environmental implications of UK more electric transition pathways: A whole systems perspective. Energy Policy 52, 103-116.IEA, 2013. Technology roadmap: Carbon capture and storage OECD / IEA, Paris.O’Keefe, L., Gough, C., and Mander S. (2013). Public perceptions of CO2 transport in pipelines. Final report from WP5.2 of the COOLTRANS project. Tyndall Manchester.Sarah Mander and Carly Mclachlan (2013). Public engagement in energy planning and its impact on low-carbon energy controversy in ‘Low-carbon energy controversies, edited by Thomas Roberts, Paul Upham, Sarah Mander, Carly Mclachlan, Clair Gough, Philip Boucher and Dana Abi Ghanem. Routledge Ltd. Chapter 10.Thomas Roberts and Sarah Mander (2013). Exploring the relationship between public perceptions of risk and trust in experts in Low-carbon energy controversies, edited by Thomas Roberts, Paul Upham, Sarah Mander, Carly Mclachlan, Clair Gough, Philip Boucher and Dana Abi Ghanem. Routledge Ltd. Chapter 4.Shackley, S., McLachlan, C. and Gough, C. (2005). The  Public Perception of Carbon Capture and Storage in the UK: Results from Focus Groups and A Survey. Climate Policy 4, 377-398. &#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;