&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Kensa Engineering Ltd (HOT25)]]]&#xa0;

[[[1.0  ]]]

[[[Why does the RHI not seem to promote heat pumps successfully]]]

[[[?]]]1.1               Phase One of the RHI, launched in November 2011, provides support for ground source heat pump installations into commercial and industrial buildings as well as district heating systems in the residential sector.  It has been an unmitigated disaster for the ground source heat pump industry, a position that was made clear by Kensa and many others during policy development and, especially, after the announcement of the launch tariffs in March 2011.  &#xa0;1.2              Sadly, the proposed Phase Two RHI policy, announced earlier in the summer and due for launch in the Spring of 2014, is similarly afflicted with issues that will conspire to have a negative impact on heat pump deployment.  That said, it is presumed that the Committee is keener to learn about the failure of Phase One hence the emphasis in this written evidence. &#xa0;1.3              The Phase One RHI public report, accessed from Ofgem’s website on August 29th, reveals that ground source heat pumps account for just 42 of the 1605 accredited installations; the installed capacity is a paltry 1.947MW.  By contrast, there are 1496 biomass boiler installations.  Most observers believe the market split of these two technologies prior to the introduction of the RHI was broadly 50/50.  That said, precise market data relating to the relative appeal of these two technologies prior to the RHI is scarce, although a DECC report on the Low Carbon Buildings Programme (Phase 2), a scheme which provided a capital grant for select applications including schools and community buildings, makes clear that ground source heat pumps were seemingly more popular than biomass boilers1.   1.4              Given this background, the subsequent significant market distortion prompted by inadequate RHI policy is entirely the fault of ignorant civil servants.  For sure, officials have failed to understand basic commercial issues (see below).  In addition, there has been a failure to properly audit the quality of information provided by third party consultants.  These shortcomings prompted Kensa Engineering to file an official complaint with DECC in early 2013.1.5              According to DECC, the intent of Phase One of the RHI was to provide a 12% rate of return to encourage the replacement of fossil fuel boilers.  The tariff calculation methodology was based upon very flawed logic.  Bizarrely, higher tariffs are offered for less efficient technologies on the basis that the running cost savings will be more modest; as a consequence, it is argued that more public subsidy will be required to deliver the required rate of return.  Clearly, this is nonsense.  However, it gets worse.  1.6              DECC presumes that the two benefits – the RHI income and the running cost savings – accrue to the same entity and that entity is responsible for the capital investment in the renewable heat installation.  This is patently not the case whenever there is a landlord/tenant relationship, common-place at the commercial and industrial properties served by Phase One, or whenever a funder has financed the installation cost.  In these cases, the landlord/funder receives the RHI income and the tenant merely benefits from any running cost savings.  As a consequence, there is a clear motivation for the landlord (or funder) to select the technology that has a relatively low capital cost and a high running cost2. This reality has prompted the sudden popularity of biomass boilers in this sector.  This issue persists to this day and is a fundamental flaw with the RHI.  1.7              DECC is trying to remedy other issues but progress is painfully slow and, typical to the whole RHI programme, often delivered months behind its own chosen schedule.  As one example, in April 2012, Kensa provided DECC with compelling evidence that the launch GSHP tariffs were woefully inadequate if the intent was to deliver a 12% rate of return.  Already, there was significant market evidence to support this view as deployment levels were tiny and most of the accredited installations had fortuitously qualified for the RHI (by virtue of being installed after July 2009): they certainly hadn’t been incentivised by it; nobody was interested.  The GSHPA supported Kensa’s position and expressed its concern in letters to the Minister, Gregory Barker MP.  1.8              In response, DECC chose to employ Sweetts Group to SEEK further evidence to establish whether the tariffs required revision. Sadly, their report was commissioned late, and delivered late, before a consultation was belatedly staged.  A final decision (about increasing the tariffs) is expected in the Autumn of 2013.  The proposed tariffs outlined in the consultation match the levels suggested by Kensa; they are around 2.5 times higher than the present tariffs, a margin of error which highlights the ineptitude of the original work (performed by AEA and endorsed by a supposed ‘expert panel’ at DECC).  Nobody at DECC has ever revealed who sat on this ‘expert panel’; it probably didn’t exist.1.9              This endorsement really was astonishingly incompetent and bordering on negligent.  For example, DECC had assumed that the load factor for a typical heat pump installation (in heating only mode) was 35% (ie. it operated for over one third of the year).  As a consequence, it was presumed the annual running cost savings would be substantial which, as we have seen, reduces the tariff.  In reality, any heating industry professional would have pointed out typical load factors were closer to 20% and lower for buildings without seven day occupation.  We have already established that no landlord or funder has any interest in a technology with a lower tariff caused by its exceptional efficiency and minimal running costs!1.10              But perhaps most worryingly of all, the ‘best practice’ application of ground source heat pumps, the ability to provide both heating and cooling, was excluded from RHI eligibility thanks to DECC’s initial insistence that only applications featuring ‘naturally occurring’ heat could qualify.  Installations which cooled the building during summer and re-charged (re-heated) the ground using the waste heat were disqualified.  Nobody within the GSHP industry had any inkling that this decision would be taken; indeed, the vast majority of the evidence provided prior to launch was linked to heating and cooling applications because they were the very installations that made financial sense and represented the majority of all prior installations.  This versatility is the true strength of the technology in the commercial sector.  1.11              Again, DECC is very slowly working towards a solution; meantime, the GSHP industry has been virtually destroyed.  Any solutions which enhance the appeal of GSHP’s will take time to have a commercial impact on the surviving companies so further casualties are likely which could delay or eliminate any recovery in deployment levels.  All this could have been avoided if DECC had employed some scientists and engineers during the initial policy development rather than rely on the shoddy work of consultants and its own economists.  In Kensa’s opinion, the Select Committee should satisfy itself that the senior responsible civil servant is competent enough to deliver future RHI policy without industry having to suffer the consequences of further avoidable errors.--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1 DECC Low Carbon Building Programme, 2006-2011, Final Report (August 2011)This report does not specifically detail the number of installations featuring each eligible technology; instead, it highlights the level of financial support provided to each technology, split by the type of applicant (see Table below).  The capital grant percentages were consistent between GSHP and biomass boilers.  The ‘School’ line provides the best comparison.  Even allowing for the higher cost of GSHP installations, it is clear that the significantly higher total grant spend demonstrates that GSHP’s were the more popular technology prior to the launch of the RHI, within schools, at least.  Kensa has not spoken to a school about a GSHP installation since the RHI was launched in 2011.&#xa0;2 The Nottingham Energy Partnership reports the following energy costs per kilowatt hour (August 2013).

[[[Type]]]

[[[Fuel]]]

[[[Fuel price (p per unit)]]]

[[[Unit]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Pence per kWh (after boiler efficiency)]]]GasMains Gas 4.78kWh5.31 (90%)OilKerosene57.56Litre6.53 (90%)BiomassPellets28.86Kg6.79 (90%)GSHPElectricity14.47kWh4.13 (350%)&#xa0;

[[[2.0 ]]]

[[[How successful will the RHI be when rolled out to households]]]

[[[?]]]2.1              If there are no changes to the proposed domestic Phase Two policy related to GSHP’s, it will provide an inadequate rate of return for smaller properties, including all social houses, and a substantial rate of return for installations at larger properties.  2.2              This outcome is almost inevitable given the crassness of the policy.  A single tariff is used for all GSHP installations regardless of property size or installation type.  Whilst it is understood that DECC’s intends to merely incentivise the 50th percentile, which means there are inevitably going to be ‘winners and losers’, the consequences of such misguided policy are obvious.  Installation costs, and therefore the level of future subsidy support, can only decrease if the supply chain is given access to the volume opportunities which exist with the social housing sector.  Kensa’s analysis reveals that there will be a negative rate of return for a typical installation at a social house whilst rates of return in excess of 20% will be routinely available for larger properties.  This variance appears odd.2.3              Indeed, in some instances, the proposed policy provides shocking value for money and fails to address many of DECC’s stated secondary objectives (reducing fuel poverty and supporting the supply chain).  For example, the policy will support many installations which would have occurred without any subsidy; this is a complete waste of tax payers’ money.  Elsewhere, some of the most vulnerable living in social properties will be unable to benefit from the lower costs associated with running GSHP’s because DECC has somehow conspired to remove support from both the RHI (by accident) and the ECO (by design).  The RHI certainly doesn’t appear to be supporting the Heat Strategy.  2.4              It is worth emphasizing that the success of the RHI will be dependent upon some external factors beyond DECC’s control.  For example, much will depend upon the price of the counterfactual fuels, notably oil and LPG.  If these fuels see a rise in price (relative to the price of electricity), there will naturally be more demand as the running cost savings will be more pronounced.  However, there could be very limited deployment if the price of oil either a) remains at its current level (58p per litre), substantially below the peak of 72p in late 2010, or b) falls.  2.5              DECC’s unwillingness to allow the RHI tariff to float in line with the price of the counterfactuals is an oversight.  Quite simply, if the price of oil increases, and official DECC publications1 believe this to be the case, it will be possible to reduce the RHI tariff levels and provide greater value to the tax payer without deflating deployment and placing at risk achievement of the 2020 targets.  That said, if the price falls, the supply chain needs some certainty that the tariff level will be increased to continue to deliver the necessary rate of return.  2.6               Of course, there are other influencers which are very much within DECC’s control.  The success of the RHI will be compromised by its increasingly close association with the Green Deal.  Householders will be required to host numerous visits and will be confused by the number and variety of assessments conducted by Green Deal Advisors, manufacturers and MCS installers.  There will be little consistency across assessments; as a consequence, confidence to underpin significant investment decisions will be in short supply.  The Green Deal is fatally wounded; every effort should be made to ensure the RHI is not infected.2.7              Finally, there are many policy loopholes which suggest DECC is still learning about the development of smart policy.  Many observers within industry now believe the RHI Team is keener to deliver policy on schedule without incurring further embarrassing delays.  For example, the decision to use an EPC to deem the heat demand figure is wide open to ‘gaming’ as the assessment process is so imprecise and the auditing regime so lax.  For sure, DECC is creating an environment which favours opportunistic installers who are prepared to flex the rules to secure a commercial advantage.  MCS is far too weak to police the abusers so there is a substantial risk of mis-selling and all the resulting problems.  After four years in development, the industry deserves far more from the RHI.--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1 DECC Fossil Fuel Price Projections - October 2012

[[[Thermal storage is a potential useful method of balancing electricity/energy demand both diurnally ]]]

[[[and annually.]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[ What is government policy doing to promote thermal storage, and should it do more/different?]]]There is a real opportunity for Government to recognise that ground source heat pumps can contribute significantly in this area.  In its 4th Carbon budget, the Committee for Climate Change has indicated that 6.8m heat pumps will be installed by 2030.  Given this number, it is vital that very careful consideration is given to the relative efficiency of the various heat pump types.  Most studies, including the latest EST Heat Pump Field Trial (Getting Warmer: July 2013) report that GSHP’s are at least 15% more efficient but this base superior efficiency can be further enhanced by inter-seasonal heat transfer and the utilisation of any waste heat to bolster ground temperatures.But there is a much bigger advantage if ground source heat pumps are favoured.  Spare grid capacity will exist through the night so heat pump installations should be over-sized and designed to operate at this time with the heat stored in some fashion (see below) for subsequent use during the day.  This requirement creates difficulties for air source heat pumps because the air temperature is typically around 6oC cooler at 2am rather than 2pm which means the appliance is significantly less efficient.  Worse, most people are trying to sleep at 2am so the noise nuisance of many ASHP’s operating at this time is considerable.  By contrast, neither of these two drawbacks will occur if ground source heat pumps are favoured.Of course, there needs to be more research into the right medium for storing the heat generated during the night.  This could be performed using large volumes of water but this is usually impractical; it could be performed by storing heat in the building structure but this may not be sufficiently controllable; instead, the most exciting current opportunity is phase change materials and more research is required in this area.There are some very interesting opportunities but the blinkered approach of the RHI is not helpful.  The RHI is looking to deliver renewable heat cheaply to achieve the 2020 target: it certainly doesn’t lay the proper foundations for the achievement of the more important, and more challenging, longer-term carbon emission reduction targets.  DECC’s failure to use the RHI to support the wider heat strategy is a further indictment on this abject policy.September 2013&#xa0;