&#xa0;&#xa0;Written evidence from Travelsure (TIC 062)&#xa0;&#xa0;Car owners are privileged that they do not have to plan their day around how they are going to get to their venue. Usually the people who do not have their own transport have the weakest voice in council affairs, and seldom have the knowledge or ability to suggest a bus service is introduced. Often worse than this is when a service which has been running for a year or more and is suddenly cut because it is no longer viable. The passengers which did use the service are left with little option of how to resume their normal life and public service loses it’s credibility. &#xa0;2. It is easy to run a service around connecting villages which then leads to a major town and hope that anyone who wishes to use this facility can get to a bus stop near to where they live. It is more difficult to serve a community which is off the beaten track but still have the same needs as everyone else. One of our local villages has fought vigilantly to keep their once a week service into the local town. This village was fortunate that it had a good voice in their community and a strong spirit to see it through. Other bus cuts have not been so lucky. The people who use this once a week service are mainly concession holders therefore little money is collected, however it is well used and they are able to make appointments etc around the time they have in town. There is a lack of low floor, easy accessible buses on the market which have 16seats or less. It is quite easy to supply a bus with only 16sts but it probably won’t have the features which are necessary for disabled access or pushchairs etc. The cost of buying these buses are usually about the same as bigger 28seat Plaxton Darts etc. Therefore it is more viable for the operator to purchase a larger bus and use it on a more profitable busy route. Government may think about helping operators to source and purchase these type of buses and use them on less profitable routes which serve smaller communities?&#xa0;3. The most important factor of public transport is reliability. The bus service needs to be planned so that connections can be made, doctor’s surgeries etc. are accessible and that there is a return service available. Timetables should be readily available, on bus stops as well as on the buses.It is better to not introduce a service than to do so then cut it after a short time. The travelling public need to be certain the bus is running before making preparations to use it . Any change to timetables etc need to be planned well in advance and advertised as such. &#xa0;4. In our area there has been so many cuts in local government projects that there is little hope left that a service such as a new local bus route may be available. If it was suggested to local Parish Councils meetings then an answer from local opinion could be sought. This would be especially appreciated as it seems that many of these rural villages are grown in size but not in amenities.We operate services both in England and Scotland and find there is a difference in usage of the travelling passengers. In Scotland the distances are not great yet people seem to use the buses far more than in England. Times of the buses are more frequent and both passengers and the buses are more reliable. &#xa0;5. People in isolated communities should not be expected to rely on taxis or community transport for their daily needs. Taxis are only available at times which suit the operator and this may not be the time the passenger is wanting to travel. &#xa0;6. Funding local transport is easy where there is knowledge that the bus route will be used and viable. Routes which are new and maybe used only occasionally are a big risk, not just for the person funding the bus but also for the travelling passenger who may find it very useful and then fall into the trap of starting to depend on it. In Scotland some of our services are connecting from villages to a main bus route and this works well for the passenger and the council as there is no need to continue the through journey with two buses. We have villages around our area which are more populated in the summer as there are caravan sites and hotels nearby. A route which serves the local community all year and yet may only need subsidising in the winter would be feasible and become a reliable and used service. The introduction of the free concessionary fare travel has had a detrimental effect on public transport in isolated communities. The formula which dictates reimbursements to the operator works well in built up communities where there are many people travelling, eg town services. However in rural areas where there are few passengers and the majority are concessionary pass holders there is little incentive for an operator to introduce a new service as the fares taken will only equate to about 33% of the appropriate fare. This coupled with the decreasing reimbursement of fuel duty rebate is a major factor of why fewer services are being  introduced or even speculated.A route which is planned, advertised and activated then becomes used and relied on. It is then cut for the winter which immediately loses credibility for the people who need it most.&#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;