&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by E.ON]]]

[[[Executive Summary]]]We are supportive of approaches designed to reduce heat demand and use heat more efficiently. Customers need to be well informed as to how they can reduce their demand, and insulation should be the first priority. We would like to see a joined up approach to heat, across all of Government. Actions taken in one Government department can have significant knock on effects to other Government policy objectives. For example changes in planning currently being consulted upon within the Housing Standards Review will impact the likelihood of distributed community energy projects being realised with a potential negative effect on the ability to reach desired heat targets.The heat market is constantly evolving and, whilst there are a number of barriers to be overcome (financial, knowledge, procurement etc), some progress is being made. We welcome Government’s continued focus in this area.We support a credible, independently audited and robust biomass sustainability policy. We are supportive of DECC’s work to date within this area, and welcome the recent response confirming grandfathering of new criteria which will provide longer term certainty for investors.

[[[Questions]]]It is critical that any heat policy is stable and free from shocks and u-turns.  Government needs an integrated approach across the whole built environment when it comes to heat energy demand reduction. It is therefore critical that all Government departments work together with the same common objective.We support the Government’s intention that it is insulation first.

[[[ ]]]Improving the fabric of buildings will increase their efficiency and may be the cheapest way to reduce carbon emissions. This should always be the first step towards low carbon heating. However, it is important that energy efficiency requirements (i.e. the level of efficiency a property must achieve) are both realistic and achievable for the consumer, taking account of the type of property they live in. We agree that the Government should support a range of heat technologies, but these must be the right technology in the right location to encourage least cost carbon abatement. Learning lessons from previous policies, it is important to avoid any one technology being over rewarded. The Government recently consulted on increasing the tariff for certain technologies under the RHI, for which we have expressed support. The RHI has shown some success but, for a real step change to occur, the tariffs did need revisiting. We would advocate the ongoing monitoring of this scheme to ensure unsustainable bubbles are not created. Whilst we are pleased that the tariffs were revisited, the Government could do more within the RHI to promote district heating. District heating is a means of efficiently distributing heat across significant distances. This infrastructure allows heat to be used effectively and, when used to distribute renewable or waste heat or heat from efficient CHP, it can allow developers or local authorities to deliver significant carbon saving across wide areas. We welcome the Government’s recognition that this is an important part of the heat energy mix and its intention to consider seriously how this could be better supported. We believe this could be done in a number of ways. We would suggest the most suitable method is a district heating network uplift to the RHI to support the renewable heat strategy, incentivising the deployment of the right technology in the right locations. There is also a role for the public and private sector to provide anchor loads for district heating networks. Government owned buildings connecting to district heating networks have a key role to play here. The refurbishment of Government owned buildings at a rate of 3% per annum, as stipulated under Article 5 of the 2012 EU Energy Efficiency Directive, could provide a useful mechanism through which to encourage such connections. Policy and planning will need to encourage them to do this which could lead to a very positive impact on the viability of district heating across the UK.Energy efficiency and well informed customers are the right starting point. There are a number of Government policies aimed at tackling energy efficiency and looking at more efficient heating systems (smart meter rollout, ECO, Green Deal, RHI, Energy Saving Opportunity Scheme etc). Since many are in their infancy or development stage, it is important to allow time for their value to be realised, before making any significant change. We would urge Government to consider all the schemes in a joined up approach to achieve the most from what is already in place.The Government’s role is not to pick technology winners but, where policy intervention is required, to set a suitable framework to allow for innovation and investment. Incentive schemes should remain stable, but with clearly set review periods to understand the costs and any non-financial barriers that may exist. Government support should be provided on a transparent and fair basis which encourages the market to develop. We welcome the establishment of the Heat Office within DECC, and look forward to more detailed policy emerging from the recent publication ‘The Future of Heating: Meeting the challenge’.We agree that biomass is a key fuel for heat production and that its contribution to the UK’s wider climate targets should be ensured by introducing longer term GHG targets and a credible, robust, independently auditable biomass sustainability policy, something E.ON has had in place since 2009. We support Government’s overall intentions in these areas and the recent policy announcement to set longer term targets for GHG which will be grandfathered. This strikes the right balance in setting tighter, but achievable targets within a longer term framework that will encourage the best biomass schemes to be progressed.Yes, we welcome the new biomass sustainability criteria that apply from April 2014. The new criteria are more challenging for biomass operators and address a number of concerns raised around the sourcing of biomass. The move to sustainable forest management criteria, for example, will further encourage the sourcing of biomass from the more appropriate locations such as Canada and the USA.When considering the local environmental impact it is important to consider the fuel that is being replaced. Generally speaking, centralised heat production in CHP or community energy schemes is likely to reduce the environmental impact overall when compared to traditional heat generation such as gas fired boilers. This is due to factors such as increased efficiency and increased dispersion levels. There could be an increase in the impact in the immediate vicinity of a heat generation centre but this would be more than offset a by reduction in the environmental impact at the point of heat consumption.The location of centralised heat generation in urban areas should ensure that local environmental impacts in the immediate vicinity are minimised and balanced against the overall reduction in environmental impact and the need to be close to centres of demand to maximise efficiency. The current UK gas infrastructure is mature and developed, which provides obvious costs benefits compared to new technologies. We believe that the electrification of domestic heating through heat pumps is the right long-term strategy, subject to a decarbonised generation supply, but this will require new skills to be developed and scaled quickly. However, it is important to recognise the role of other technologies such as more efficient gas boilers and micro-CHP as part of the transition to this longer term ambition of domestic heating.We would caution against assumptions that new sources of unconventional gas in the UK will dramatically reduce energy bills. New sources of gas could have a beneficial impact on price but it should be recognised both that there are uncertainties about the scale and recoverability of unconventional gas in the UK and that the UK is part of a well connected European market and consequently UK gas prices are strongly influenced by wider European and global gas prices. Community heating / CHP, which we typically would see as being district heating, offers flexibility over time as a number of different heat sources can supply the same network. It can be integrated within local authority plans for urban growth and regeneration. Currently it is estimated that less than 2% of the UK’s heat demand is provided via heat networks. Much more could and should be made of this. The community energy/district heating schemes emerging in the UK over the last ten years can be split into two distinct types:There are a number of barriers facing community heating, with one of the main difficulties being attracting finance and reaching commercialisation. Obtaining capital funding is a challenge because the typical payback for a project is long in commercial terms, coupled with a high upfront cost and uncertainty of return. This is mainly due to uncertainties with the availability and longevity of the heat loads, the prices obtainable for the heat and electricity produced and the cost of the fuel supply. It is a market in the UK which is still relatively new and in its infancy, with industry uncertainty about regulation contributing to the increased investment risk. However, in other European countries such as Sweden and Denmark, district heating is a mature solution.In addition, some property developers have concerns around selling homes linked to networks. The supply of heat to heat network customers is subject to consumer protection law but, as a key player within this field, we have advocated the establishment of an Independent Heat Customer Protection Scheme, which sets out standards to apply to the operators of district heating networks. This will be critical to building confidence with customers and the general public.Issues which are also regarded as important both by local authority and property developer representatives include the need to ensure transparency in heat pricing (as noted above) and a lack of generally accepted contractual arrangements. Resolving these issues must be a priority for ensuring that community energy becomes more common in the UK. DECC has conducted research into barriers which are currently preventing the deployment of individual district heating schemes.Local authorities should take a central role in enabling the development, deployment and expansion of heat networks within their locality. Anchor loads through public buildings and social housing can provide a steady source of heat demand and long term confidence for investors. If authorities publicised community heating opportunities and the availability of suitable sources of heat demand, this may help bring together the owners of heat demand, energy suppliers and infrastructure providers and communities to develop the potential for low and zero carbon heat infrastructure in their areas.The Heat Office within DECC has stated its intention to review this area and look for opportunities to help open up the market and remove some of the barriers investors and communities face. We believe incentives, for example through a district heating uplift tariff within the RHI, are required to really make a difference. Support for the retrofit market will also be needed if the Government is serious about community heating over the longer term. &#xa0;Policy stability is also crucial. We are disappointed with the recent removal of the CCL exemption (LECs) for CHP, particularly in light of assurances previously given as to its continuance. This has severely undermined recent investment in CHP and is likely to reduce new investment in CHP as future investors may view any future policy as unstable as a result. Government should replace the CCL levy exemption for both new and existing CHP plant with a mechanism of equivalent value.&#xa0;To date, the market has been driven to a large extent by forward thinking local authorities, using local plans as a key tool for requiring developments in the local area to incorporate energy efficiency and carbon targets within their schemes. A strong planning framework is essential to driving the right type of behaviour for the development of new build properties. Therefore a stronger planning framework within which to take schemes forward is a key issue to address. Our concern is that, even in light of the Coalition’s reiterated commitment to Zero Carbon Homes from 2016, the recently announced 2014 Part L Building Regulations, combined with the current Department of Community and Local Government proposals to simplify housing standards, risk holding up the deployment and expansion of district heating schemes.  &#xa0;We are extremely concerned that the potential repealing of powers available to local authorities under the Planning and Energy Act 2008, which enable local authorities to specify energy requirements on new build properties, could weaken the ability of a local authority to encourage the growth and expansion of district heating schemes. The application of such powers (informed by a cost benefit analysis) plays an important role in nurturing the development of community energy schemes. If planning does not take a strong position now, our concern is that the capability and innovation being seen within the market today will fall away, resulting in costs rising in the future. Therefore, there is a risk that the UK could miss out on a deploying a future proofed, low carbon infrastructure today which can provide lower energy costs and carbon benefits in the future.&#xa0;&#xa0;Table of parameters for some domestic heating technologies in ESME:TechnologyEfficiency for 2010 vintage technologyCapex (£/kW)LifetimeBiomass Boiler87% 52815 yearsElectric Resistive Heating90%17515 yearsGas Boiler87%16715 yearsASHP208%60020 yearsGSHP315%120020 yearsMicro CHP78% (for heat and elec)350015 yearsSolar thermal50%~ 160020 years&#xa0;If we install low carbon electric heat pumps we also need to consider the peak carbon emissions associated with peak generation periods which tend to be high carbon; this leads to the hybrid scenario with gas boilers taking peak for a very long time.  It also contradicts DECC’s simplistic approach to Heat Pump design which is actually counter-productive and discourages smart control of Heat Pumps.  Essentially you cannot examine a technology in isolation from the system within which it operates.Cooling should be treated comparably to other energy services given it provides similar benefits as heat, albeit to a different market.  The primary use for base load chill will be that of continuous temperature control, such as for refrigeration of perishable goods (for example our CHP asset Citigen supplies Smithfield market) and data rooms where IT equipment generate a significant amount of heat. Based on our experiences at our Citigen site, there is a growing demand for chill in the commercial sector due to the modern design of office buildings where heat is retained within these buildings which creates a requirement for space cooling in the summer.  From a scheme such as Citigen, developers are looking for a dual supply of heat in the winter and cooling in the summer to their developments. Cooling can be provided either from electric chillers or by using heat as an energy input into an absorption chiller which then produces cooling as an output.  Theoretically the same waste heat from a CHP unit can supply the same building with pure heat in the winter and then as an energy input to generate cooling in the summer.  Hence there is an argument that, given the similarities between heat and cooling, they should be subject to the same treatment, although we would not foresee a domestic market for cooling or widespread significant opportunities for cooling networks such as the 4km cooling network at Citigen.The tariff levels were not sufficient to promote effective deployment of the technology.Heat pumps are an effective way of helping to meet the EU renewable targets by displacing fossil and oil-fuelled heat with renewable heat, with a relatively modest increase in electricity demand. Once the Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI) is introduced for the domestic market next year, we believe this market will grow, in particular providing off gas grid consumers with a real alternative to oil and LPG boilers. If installed correctly and the user is trained adequately, the returns for both the customer, and carbon savings, can be attractive. For example, when compared to an LPG boiler, a customer living in an average three bed semi-detached house with a ground source heat pump would save £435 and 1.75t of carbon, equivalent to 45% carbon savings. For the same property type with an air-source heat pump the saving would be £300, or 1.4t of carbon, equivalent to 30% savings. We supported the recent Government consultation which proposed changes to the tariff levels for heat pumps; this is necessary to bring about a more suitable level of deployment.We also are pleased that there has been recognition of the benefits of combined heating and cooling systems for GSHP. The proposed removal of the banding helps as it does not create an artificial market where organisations size the pump to fit in with the tariff structure, but rather seeks to meet the needs of the customer. The proposed tiering in our view will prevent gaming and should mean that financial modelling will be simpler, a benefit as it will create downside protection for the finance community, helping to increase the likelihood of securing funding.In 2012 E.ON announced that it would be working with Sainsbury and Geothermal International to roll out the first phase of an innovative energy solution to up to 100 stores, using renewable energy from deep underground to provide energy efficient heating, hot water and cooling. The proposal was that both Geothermal International and E.ON would be working with Sainsbury’s to install and operate geo-thermal heat pump technology, with the scheme aiming to deliver up to 100MW of renewable energy sources in supermarkets by the end of 2016. Whilst we were able to deliver some of this ambitious project, the funding the RHI provided was not sufficient to carry on with this project. Changes to the tariff are needed if the RHI is to promote heat pumps successfully. We hope that the proposed tariff increase will prevent projects such as these from having to be discontinued in the future.The RHI remains a key policy tool for tackling carbon emissions and striving towards achieving the EU requirement that 15% of final energy consumption should come from renewable energy sources by 2020. We hope it will be successful at a domestic level, and believe that the proposed tariffs will lead to significant interest. We support Government’s intention to target the residential market predominately at ‘off-gas grid’ households. Whilst the delays in implementing the RHI domestic scheme will have impacted the market, if designed properly, we would expect to see innovation and customer take-up of the propositions.Thermal storage is a key part of an integrated city wide heating solution and is commonplace in countries such as Denmark and Sweden. Incorporating thermal storage into district heating systems which utilise gas fired CHP enables these assets to provide demand response and capacity provision of electricity at times of system imbalance. This also works the other way round when the CHP can be turned off to respond to over capacity in the system and the heat which has stored in the thermal store can be released to meet heating demand. The Government needs to do more to encourage and support the deployment of thermal storage.September 2013&#xa0; https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/archives/Smart%20City%20Intelligent%20Energy%20Opportunities.pdf