&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[WOMENSTEC Belfast (WSC031)]]]Introduction - WOMENSTEC1.              The WOMEN'STEC is an innovative organisation in Northern Ireland which aims to provide facilities to advance women's involvement in sectors of training and employment in areas dominated by men, such as construction and IT, and specifically women who are socially and economically disadvantaged.2.              The WOMEN'STEC was born of a recognised need for non traditional training for women in Northern Ireland. "Non Traditional Training" refers to training for jobs in industry sectors with historically low female representation.3.              Traditionally women have not opted for or been trained in construction and IT jobs, and even today they represent a minuscule percentage of trainee places across the North and South of Ireland as a whole.4.              The WOMEN'STEC is unique in that we support women to address the barriers that prevent them from embarking on a career in industry. Whether this is lack of childcare, problems with travel, financial implications or lack of confidence to go into a male dominated industry, we will support them in overcoming these issues.Background to the Underrepresentation of Women in STEM Careers5.              In the experience of WOMENSTEC, women face multiple barriers to entry into occupations traditionally regarded as male, such as STEM careers and manual trades, as follows:a.              Societal expectations and attitudes about what constitutes ‘women’s’ and ‘men’s’ jobsb.              Upbringing that assumes ‘male’ and ‘female’ stereotypes, such as what toys male and female children are given, parental and family role models, household tasks, etc.c.              Streaming towards ‘male’ and ‘female’ subjects in educationd.              Careers advice that assumes ‘male’ and ‘female’ stereotypes for future employmente.              ‘Male’ environments in further education establishments for STEM and manual trades subjectsf.              Reluctance of companies to take female apprenticesg.              ‘Male’ working environments in majority male workplacesh.              Workplace discrimination and harassmenti.              Isolation of small numbers of women in ‘male’ occupations&#xa0;&#xa0;6.              These social and physical barriers can be summarised in the following table:&#xa0;&#xa0;7.              These issues have been traced in the past by various reports, such as that of the Women and Work Commission report of 2006, and these influences are still being noted today.  Past research has shown that men in majority female occupations do not suffer the same disadvantage, indeed are more likely to prosper than in other occupations.Initiatives to Encourage Women into STEM Careers8.              Bearing in mind the barriers, WOMENSTEC has developed practices to encourage women in entering non-traditional occupations.  These include the following:a.              Awareness raising – Stereotypical attitudes are challenged through public advertising, participation in events and outreach in community organisations.b.              Non-traditional training – Initial training in all-women environments provide opportunities for women to acquire non-traditional skills in areas such as joinery, plumbing, horticulture, ICT, electrics and decorating in a supportive environment with a view to transition to more advanced training in male-dominated environments.c.              Capacity building – Alongside non-traditional training, women receive support in areas such as personal development and discrimination awareness to build confidence to enter environments that can be exclusive or even hostile to women.d.              Support and mentoring – During and after non-traditional training, women receive personal support and follow-up to provide help in addressing barriers to participation.e.              Role models – Female tutors in non-traditional skills provide training and demonstrate that stereotypes can be broken.f.              Practical experience – A social economy business brings together women with non-traditional skills providing services to the public and to organisations, particularly those where male providers may present an issue, for example, in women’s refuges, etc.g.              Advice and guidance – Non-stereotypical assistance and signposting is provided for women and for other organisations and establishments to demonstrate options for career development beyond sex stereotypes.h.              Business start-up – Many non-traditional skills, such as manual trades, are relevant to self-employment, where again, women are under-represented.  In this case, women are supported to undertake a trade dominated by men in a sector dominated by men.9.              A model to promote non-traditional occupations for women, supported by EU funding, was the Women into Non-Traditional Sectors (WINS) project, led by Belfast City Council in partnership with other employers (Translink, Northern Ireland Housing Executive and the Construction Industry Training Board) and other organisations (WOMENSTEC, Training for Women Network, Belfast GEMS, Helm Corporation, Queen’s University Belfast and the Irish Congress of Trades Unions).  The resulting model is represented in the diagram below.10.              The model worked through the following phases:a.              Awareness raising and recruitment – Through advertising, road shows and direct connection with key organisations, women were encouraged to participate in the project, as well as promoting the idea of non-traditional employment.b.              Assessment – The needs and aspirations of participants were discussed in one to one consultations, where those for whom participation in the project were recruited and others referred to other employment opportunities or offered alternative non-traditional training.c.              Soft skills training – Participants were engaged in personal development, discrimination awareness and non-traditional taster courses to build confidence and foster the development of non-traditional skills.d.              Employment-specific training – Courses more directed towards the chosen areas of employment were undertaken, including the acquisition of accredited qualifications.e.              Work placement – Where applicable, participants undertook work experience in one of the areas of employment on offer from the employers involved in the project.  Where this experience proved not to be a match with participant aspirations and interests, further referral to other employment opportunities was offered.f.              Employment training – Where applicable, more formal skills training with a view to recruitment was undertaken.g.              Onward progression – Where matched with a recruitment process, participants applied for work in non-traditional areas with the project employers, progressed to further training, or were referred to other opportunities.h.              Mentoring and support – A key element to the project was ongoing mentoring of participants to provide advice and guidance and to identify and address problems.  Practical support, such as childcare and transport, where appropriate, were provided as interim measures, in view of the needs of the participants and multiple barriers they faced.11.              The WINS model was tested as a comprehensive approach to encouraging and assisting more women into non-traditional sectors of employment.  It should be seen as a set of ingredients that have the potential to address some of the barriers to women entering male-dominated areas of the economy.  Adapting to circumstances, elements of the model can be taken and used in a variety of contexts to tackle the same or similar barriers to participation many women face.  Ultimately, however, the model prepares women for environments shaped for men.  Ideally, environments should be shaped for participation by both women and men.12.              In the interim, an important part of developing the capacity to assist women in entering traditionally male fields is the provision of an environment for the development of skills and confidence in a more supportive environment.  This is where women-only spaces are important as incubation or nurturing environments, so that women can develop non-traditional skills, at least initially, without the pressure or sometimes the hostility that learning spaces oriented towards men can present.  WOMENSTEC is one model where specialised  provisions of training and support for women considering non-traditional employment can take place, but other women-only spaces, such as in women’s centres or through women-only classes at training establishments, can provide similar or elements of such provision.13.              If the Committee would like further information on the models mentioned above, please contact WOMENSTEC at the address below:August 2013&#xa0;&#xa0; WOMENSTEC website: http://www.womenstec.com/.  These barriers have been traced over the years by research specific to Northern Ireland: Carey, M (1987) ‘Women in non-traditional employment in Northern Ireland: A marginalised form of femininity’ in Byrne, A and Leonard, M, (eds) Women and Irish society: A sociological reader, 97–110. Dublin: Beyond the Pale; McWilliams, M (1991) ‘Women’s paid work and the sexual division of labour’ in Davies, C and McLaughlin, E (eds) Women, Employment and Social Policy in Northern Ireland: A Problem Postponed?  Belfast: Policy Research Institute, 21–40; Barry, U, and Potter, M (2007) Women in non-traditional occupations: Lessons from North and South, Dublin: WINS/Equal at Work. Women and Work Commission (2006) Shaping a fairer future, London: Women and Work Commission. For example, England P and Herbert, M (1993), ‘The Pay of Men in ‘female’ Occupations: Is Comparable Worth only for Women?’ in Williams, C (ed) Doing ‘Women’s’ Work: men in Nontraditional Occupations, Newbury Park: Sage, 28-48; Williams, C (2004), ‘The Glass Escalator: Men who do Women’s Work’ in Sacks, N and Marrone, C (eds), Gender and Work in Today’s World, Cambridge: Westview, 105-122. In the case of WOMENSTEC, this is TRADESWOMEN NI: http://www.womenstec.com/index.cfm/area/page/section/2.  For a more in-depth examination of the WINS model, see Potter, M and Hill, M (2009), ‘Women into non-traditional sectors: addressing gender segregation in the Northern Ireland workplace’ in Journal of Vocational Education and Training 61(2), 133-150.