&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[the ]]]

[[[Cambridge Association for Women]]]

[[[ in Science and Engineering (Cambridge ]]]

[[[AWiSE]]]

[[[) (WSC033)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;Cambridge AWiSE was originally set up in 1994 as a local branch of AWiSE. It had an active programme of events, and was primarily academic in focus. The organisation was expanded in 2004 to provide greater local support and networking opportunities for women in SET in both industry and academia in Cambridgeshire and beyond. Cambridge AWiSE&#xa0; is a voluntary organisation run by a Steering Group and a paid coordinator; membership currently stands at about 100 members, and the events programme for 2013-14 includes around 15 events. Events are open to non-members as well as members.The Select Committee’s Inquiry into Women in STEM Careers focuses on one of Cambridge AWiSE’s core concerns, hence our interest in submitting this evidence.We held a networking event on July 10th 2013, and asked the attendees to consider the four questions at the heart of the inquiry. These were adapted slightly so as to include non-academic careers and employers. The following paragraphs provide a summary of the responses received.4a. Pressure of balancing family and work commitments. As women progress in STEM careers, the responsibilities diversify (research, teaching, clinical, administration, committees, etc.) and increase, limiting the flexibility and amount of time available for family commitments. The lack of part-time positions, flexible working, or job-sharing positions was a key factor that affects the ability of women to progress in STEM careers. When flexible work arrangements do exist, they are not fully considered in the work timetables. Networking events often occur after work hours, conflicting with family commitments. 4b. Career breaksCareer breaks for maternity leave and other family responsibilities tend to limit an individual’s publication rate, which affects tenure reviews and grant applications. Also, during a career break, it is difficult to keep track of the developments and contacts in the individual’s STEM field of expertise. If the career break takes place during a grant period, then it could negatively affect the annual performance on the grant and the ability to obtain new research grants, especially in large multi-organizational ones.4c. Monetary factors The effort put into careers by women can be less financially rewarded than for men. Due to the lack of positions available for progression in STEM careers and the high level of competition for those positions, women may decide to take a more secure position outside of STEM careers. Financial and job insecurity due to short-term postdoctoral contracts is problematic as child care requires a permanent income. Also, if both carers are working, then finding affordable, reliable child care is another issue.4d. Culture of exclusionA few comments highlighted the established network amongst male colleagues and the culture of exclusion for women in some STEM careers. It was mentioned that perhaps women communicate differently from men and may have to learn the established hierarchical thinking and power structure.4e. Image of women scientists in the media and the artsResponses pointed to the lack of women role models in higher levels of STEM careers and suggested more proactive mentoring programs to encourage young females who are interested in STEM. However, these role models need to be positive ones as some established female workers, classified with “Queen Bee syndrome”, make it more difficult for other females due to their own difficult experience obtaining their position.5a. New careers When women leave STEM positions, they transition into a diversity of other positions. One category is people-oriented positions, including teaching, public engagement, science outreach, administration, helpline management, career advising, child-care or house-wife positions. Another is applied research positions, including industrial research roles, lab management, technician positions, sales and marketing. Others move into careers with more financial security, such as project management, patent law, publishing, politics, accounting, political lobbying and advising as well as scientific or management consulting. Finally, women sometimes choose careers with more flexibility and opportunities by transitioning to self-employment, entrepreneurship, private consultancy, scientific writing, and interim roles such as maternity cover positions.5b. ConsequencesThese are three-fold; the transition affects the individual, the STEM career workplaces and the alternative employment positions. The new employers receive scientifically trained employees who tend to be skilled in some or all of the following: problem-solving, analysis, team-building, leadership, public-speaking, management, understanding of scientific methods and personnel. However, in leaving STEM careers, these employees may lose their skills that are specific to their field of expertise and encounter reduced opportunities for applying their specific talents, training and experiences in their new roles. The transition may require a fast learning-curve in an unfamiliar work environment, resulting in less confident employees, lower qualified positions, and lower salaries for these employees. For STEM career workplaces, the transition contributes to a distinct lack of diversity and female role models in top STEM positions.&#xa0;6a. Support for career progressionEmployers should provide women graduates and PhD students with strong encouragement and support for career progression through effective mentoring and personal development, enabling them to build on qualifications and technical experience to be able to move into new roles within an organisation. Many women would like to have more on-the-job coaching and training, for example in people management in order to have the possibility of progressing into management roles that use and extend their technical knowledge. Transferable skills developed during degree and postgraduate work, such as project management, need to be better recognised and valued by employers so that women can be encouraged to apply for senior roles and eventual progression onto board positions. More senior technically-trained women in an organisation provide role models for retention of women graduate students. 6b. FlexibilityMany women graduates and PhD students wish to remain or progress in technically oriented employment but with flexibility for part-time working and family commitments. These positions need to be more readily available and better valued in an organisation. Longer-term contracts for new PhD graduates in research roles would provide better job stability and security to develop and progress a career. Employers need to provide better support for access to child-care, job-sharing, flexible and phased return to work and options for working from home to accommodate caring responsibilities.6c. Financial factorsIt goes without saying that employers must establish equal pay for equal positions, and pay postgraduate students a living wage equivalent to their skill level.6d. Examples of good practiceGlasgow Veterinary School and Boehringer Ingelheim were cited as examples of good practice. In addition, the Wellcome Trust offers fellowships targeting career breaks, and has local childcare facilities at its campus near Cambridge. The Daphne Jackson Trust was also highlighted for its fellowships (though not an employer as such)      7a. Legislation Legislation could be introduced to limit the use of short term contracts, and/or require women's participation in management roles (e.g. quotas).  The government could also set an example by making more women visible in senior ministerial and civil service positions (offering realistic female role models), and advocating, perhaps through a media campaign, retention and diversity as economic drivers (research shows mixed teams are more productive than single sex teams). 7b. PolicyThe Government could adopt and promote more policies and programmes around childcare and parenting, in the form of subsidised childcare (not only for early years), tax relief, or child care loans, funding for childcare at conferences, and improving the system for paternity leave and fathers' time off. &#xa0;7c. FundingSupport, through funding and/or other means, should be provided for organisations and programmes that support women in STEM. &#xa0;These could include Women in STEM associations (like AWiSE), mentoring programmes, personal development training, specialised careers advice, and support for career breaks and training. &#xa0;7d. Changing attitudesIt is important that the Government works to change negative attitudes towards working mothers and part-time working (for both men and women), and promotes the value society holds for both men and women in family life.&#xa0;August 2013&#xa0;