&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from]]]

[[[ Hampshire County Council]]]

[[[ (TIC 070)]]]Hampshire is a large county – 3,700 square kilometres with a population of 1.3 million. It is 85% rural, yet 77% of the population live in the urban areas. Car ownership and journey to work length are above the national average reducing opportunities for public transport.  &#xa0;Against this background, Hampshire County Council has developed a range of transport initiatives, training and community engagement programmes and has participated in national projects. The opportunity to respond to the Committee is welcomed.&#xa0;For simplicity, we have provided responses against the questions posed by the Committee. We will be happy to clarify or expand any answer if required.&#xa0;1.1 In our countywide review of passenger transport over the period 2006-2009 we combined a wide range of existing data including census information as to age, car ownership and income, DfT Accession software showing access by public transport and on foot  to key amenities, on-bus surveys of passenger travel patterns, journey purpose, age and ethnicity and modal split information. &#xa0;1.2 Nonetheless, the people who understand local needs best are the elected Members and the local community, so Hampshire has established a network of parish transport representatives and holds annual passenger transport forums  for each district. These have a membership of 1,900 representing a wide range of community groups and organisations. The forums are an essential part of gaining information about local issues and developing and testing transport options. &#xa0;2.1 As part of our work for the LGA Transport Innovation Project, we developed a   process of co-design, working closely with the local community, other service providers, external agencies and other County Council departments. We contributed to the County Council’s Older Person’s Well-being Strategy and worked closely with local members of the UK Young Persons’ Parliament. One outcome has been the widely publicised Transport Self-help Kit which enables local groups or communities to undertake a detailed audit of existing transport provision and unmet local demand and see what solutions they could develop. http://www3.hants.gov.uk/passengertransport/transport-self-help-kit.htm2.2 The major Bus Subsidy Review in 2011, which built on the earlier review work, involved detailed consultation through a wide range of channels and a comprehensive Equalities Impact Assessment. On bus passenger surveys asked passengers to volunteer anonymous personal data and home post code which was be matched to Mosaic data to help measure how service delivery represented the community we serve.  

[[[&#xa0;]]]3.1 Isolation can be due to geography, mobility, lack of awareness, cultural barriers changed personal circumstances, such as the loss of a partner who drove, or financial concerns. Community engagement through parish transport representatives and transport forums seeks to overcome awareness and cultural barriers whilst information provision at bus stops and stations, through electronic media and via printed material seeks to ensure that services are well promoted.3.2 Hampshire County Council has been successful in achieving the re-opening of Chandler’s Ford railway station, and as a statutory consultee maintaining and improving services here and at other, often rural, stations. The County Council actively supports two local Community Rail Partnerships which help develop the Chandler’s Ford line and removed the closure risk of the Lymington branch. Community involvement is central to success.3.3 Bus users are widely represented among older and disadvantaged groups and the County Council has been successful in projects such as the A3 Star corridor and the Eclipse Bus Rapid Transit project between Fareham and Gosport. These have helped boost bus use to a twenty year high across Hampshire as well as promoting economic activity in deprived areas. http://www3.hants.gov.uk/tfsh/eclipse.htm3.4 Conventional buses are mass transit and work best on highly populated corridors. A simpler strategic network of frequent services supported by demand responsive or community transport services seems the most sustainable. This enables investment in modern easy access vehicles and allows rising fuel and wage costs to be recovered from passenger fares.3.5 Hampshire introduced the pioneering Cango flexible bus model in 2001. This combines fixed point, turn up and go travel, with bookable flexible routeing to provide a scheduled public bus which can meet the travel needs of dispersed communities.4.1 Hampshire has an active and well-developed community transport sector.  It follows a tool-box approach rather than a single solution and the County Council underpins a partnership with third sector organisations, volunteers and district and parish councils. The County Council contributes significant funding, offers start-up advice and grants, supports volunteer recruitment and provides a range of best practice sharing sessions, road shows, nationally recognised training programmes such as MiDAS and professional support and advice. 4.2 This strength of the community transport sector in Hampshire is in part due to the partnership approach which the authority has developed since the early 1980s. The sector is diverse with a wide range of organisations providing transport in the county, this includes: &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;4.3 Community transport is not a low-cost or no-cost option. Community-led organisations depend on local willingness and the availability of volunteers. This can make equality of provision between areas difficult to achieve. Many individuals and organisations value their independence. The County Council has found that the toolbox approach, with a range of solutions, training and support and the use of commercial services such as Taxishares, where appropriate, can prove effective at meeting travel needs.5.1 Opportunities to extend rail provision are limited and a conventional bus service is only cost-effective where passenger numbers warrant it. Those living close to urban bus networks in Hampshire are enjoying some of the best frequencies and most modern vehicles that have ever been provided, helped by County Council investment in Quality Bus Partnerships. Those who live in a rural area on a busy inter-urban bus route often have services that are as good as those of fifty years ago, apart from evenings and Sundays where higher car ownership has taken custom.  In other areas new solutions are needed.5.2 Hampshire has shown that Cango and community bus services can provide scheduled services in a different way. In addition, Hampshire has developed Taxi-shares to offer a timetabled service at local bus fares. They do require users to pre-book but this means that the service only runs when required so that costs are contained and a service retained where a conventional bus would be unaffordable. http://www3.hants.gov.uk/passengertransport/communitytransport/taxishares.htm6.1 In Hampshire, over 70% of bus services are provided commercially, that is funded by passenger fares. The County Council supports these services through Quality bus Partnerships, Better Bus Area and Local Sustainable Transport Fund projects, bus stop and bus station infrastructure investment and information provision. 6.2 Bus operating costs such as fuel and wages have been rising faster than general inflation meaning that services can become uneconomic and any replacement might look for subsidy funding from the local authority. Bus operators claim that concessionary fares reimbursement does not meet lost fares income, whilst BSOG has been reduced. Both have a potential to increase pressure on a finite bus subsidy budget.6.3 Concessionary fares reimbursement has placed a burden on Travel Concession Authorities, which are often Local Transport Authorities, as central government funding is based on a formula according to population whilst cost are incurred according to use resulting in a funding shortfall. The eligible passholder population is projected to rise and central government funding to fall.6.4 Availability of free concessionary travel means that chargeable services such as Dial-a-Ride are expected to accept passes or offer a discount – in Hampshire, the County Council subsidises half fare travel on Dial-a-Ride for concessionary pass holders. Similarly, residents sometimes press for a bus service to be provided so that they can use their free passes even though there is a rail alternative offering reasonable, but not free, fares. Both are cost pressures.6.5 As facilities such as health, Post Offices or banking centralise to save costs, there is an expectation that public transport will be available. This can involve travel to locations away from the previous public transport network, longer journeys than are attractive to bus users or appointment times that are earlier than the existing timetable can accommodate. All these can be additional costs on a finite bus subsidy budget, and although vital journeys for the users, low and fragmented demand means that continuing subsidy would be required.6.5 For community transport, an ageing population points to a continuing demand, but family or work commitments reduce the availability of volunteers while funding pressures on upper-tier and district councils put budgets at risk. A variety of approaches as demonstrated by Hampshire is essential but costs will remain.6.6 Age UK in their report on Later Life in Rural England of July 2013 recognise that lower rural population density and greater distances will increase journey cost per person and seek recognition of this through a ‘rural premium’ and ‘rural-proofing to take into account policy impacts. Hampshire County Council seeks to address this through use of voluntary car schemes and scheduled Taxishare services.6.7 The benefits to the individual, to the wider community and the savings on health and social care budgets which come from good personal mobility through effective public and community transport can be difficult to quantify and any financial benefits would appear under a different budget heading to that where the cost falls.&#xa0;&#xa0;Hampshire County Council experience over thirty years is that good public transport solutions are possible by working in partnership with all elements of the local community. Community engagement is essential to gain support and ensure that provision evolves as needs change. A variety of solutions, or toolbox approach, is needed to address the needs of different individuals and varying situations. Community engagement is demanding of time; local initiatives require help and advice but produce some excellent results. Volunteers and the local community have a vital role to play but significant on-going funding remains a requirement.&#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;