&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by E3G (CCS33)]]]

[[[1. Summary]]]1.1              The current UK approach to CCS is too narrowly focussed on electricity generation and the procurement of individual projects. This must be urgently supplemented by a view on what ultimate deployment of CCS could look like in a decarbonised economy, and the necessary practical actions that are required to enable this to be achieved.1.2              The Office of CCS within DECC is tied down in ‘delivery’ mode. While recognising that it is seeking to do a difficult task with reduced funding, it is failing to catalyse the parallel efforts in enabling infrastructure and industrial CCS required to enable wider deployment and cost reduction. The OCCS is also responsible for fossil fuel strategy, but CCS is insufficiently integrated into current policies – particularly the gas strategy and the prospects for continued use of coal. 1.3              UK policy on CCS appears to reflect a fear of being seen to be ‘picking winners’: the first UK competition picked a technology option and suffered for it. We would therefore agree that maintaining openness to different capture technologies should be continued. However it is imperative that a more proactive approach be taken to ‘pick geologies’ (for large-scale storage) and ‘pick geographies’ (for infrastructure investment). This will provide the largest benefits to the UK via cost reduction, the retention of industrial jobs and the development of exportable CCS engineering and integration expertise.1.4              Previous UK leadership on CCS in Europe and internationally has been diminished over recent years. The UK needs to ensure that it secures funding from the second round of the NER300 mechanism, and should be taking a more proactive approach to EU policy discussions. The introduction of a CCS certificate system (or similar) could bring significant benefits for UK projects.

[[[2. About E3G and ]]]

[[[our engagement in ]]]

[[[CCS]]]2.1               E3G is an independent, non-profit organisation operating in the public interest to accelerate the global transition to sustainable development. E3G builds cross-sectoral coalitions to achieve carefully defined outcomes, chosen for their capacity to leverage change. E3G works closely with like-minded partners in government, politics, civil society, science, the media, public interest foundations and elsewhere. Further information is available at www.e3g.org .2.2              E3G welcomes the ECC committee inquiry into CCS. E3G has been closely involved in UK, European and International efforts to accelerate action on CCS over the past decade, including the creation of the EU’s NER300 funding mechanism and the Near Zero Emission Coal (NZEC) project between the UK, EU and China. E3G is represented on the Advisory Council of the European Technology Platform for Zero Emission Fossil Fuel Power Plants (ZEP) and is a member of the International Environmental NGO network on CCS.2.3              E3G recognises that it will be difficult for the international community to secure a global deal on climate unless key countries and constituencies feel that they can maintain energy security while reducing emissions. In our view, the deployment of CCS is therefore both a technological necessity (as a stable climate will only be secured if we limit the stock of CO2 emissions in the atmosphere) and a political intervention that can shape the space for other actions and agreements.2.4              In this submission, we look at three areas that we believe require additional attention from UK policy makers: We will be pleased to provide additional evidence if requested.&#xa0;

[[[3. Context: why CCS? What should be prioritised?]]]3.1              The premise behind CCS is simple but stated with insufficient frequency or clarity. A continued growth in CO2 emissions to the atmosphere will result in an unstable climate and ocean acidification. This is related to the stock of CO2 in the atmosphere, not the rate of emissions in any particular year. 3.2              To adequately address this challenge, emissions of CO2 must not just be slowed – they must ultimately be stopped. Indeed, the forthcoming 5th Assessment Report of the IPCC is expected to highlight that negative emissions will be required to operate globally at large scale before 2050 in addition to CCS on power plant and industry, in order to limit global climate warming to less than 2°C. Thus, CO2 needs to be removed from earth’s biosphere into permanent sequestration. 3.3              The technological challenge facing humanity is therefore to phase out the use of unabated fossil fuels, or, where this is not possible, to deploy CCS. 3.4              CCS will be indispensable to mitigate emissions from processes where CO2 emissions are an integral part of production (steel, cement, chemicals etc) and to enable negative emissions (via direct air capture or in combination with biomass) as a means of offsetting other sources of emissions that cannot be captured at source. 3.5              CCS for electricity generation is different, in that it provides just one option among others for the production of low-carbon electricity. CCS does however offer the prospect of flexible generation capacity that can be dispatched in support of a high Renewables grid. CCS will be particularly valuable for locations with significant industrial production capacity, as it will be able to provide both low-carbon electricity and heat, and share the costs of CO2 transport and storage with other emitters. 3.6              It should therefore be noted that the UK approach of seeking to enable cost-competitive deployment of CCS within the electricity generation sector seeks to address the CCS challenge from the opposite end of this set of problems. It posits that making CCS ‘available’ will then enable deployment via carbon prices. It fails to take a view on what is likely to be desirable as an end-state deployment of CCS within a low-carbon economy, nor on what enabling actions will be required to enable this widespread deployment to occur. The absence of a proactive approach on CO2 transport and storage infrastructures and the exclusion of industrial CCS are symptomatic of this approach. The USA has shown far greater ability to develop CCS projects by specifically focussing on these practical aspects of the CCS challenge.3.7              It should be noted here that the value of CCS is not the same as the cost of CCS per ton of CO2 captured or stored. The highest value for CCS in future will be for negative emissions that assist in climate stabilization. Next will be the value for job retention and maintained economic output for the economy from CCS on industrial production. The valuation of CCS on power generation should subsequently be based on the cost of CCS when measured against clean power produced, not by tons of CO2. This would indicate that CCS on natural gas is preferable to CCS on coal or lignite, as it has half the CO2 volume.3.8              Across Europe, the potential for CCS on gas has been regrettably overlooked in favour of coal and lignite, due to the centrality of emissions trading as the favoured policy instrument and the assumption that CCS should be deployed first on lignite, then coal due to higher carbon costs. On this logic, CCS would only be deployed on gas if the cost of carbon reaches over €100/ton, with CCS on industry a long-way down the line (due to higher costs per ton due to lower CO2 volumes). The UK Commercialisation Programme has addressed this by valuing CCS for electricity generation on the basis of electricity output rather than per ton of CO2, but has failed to apply this same logic to the industrial sector.3.9              The prioritisation of CCS on gas-fired electricity generation rather than coal is also desirable when considering global emissions limits. CCS on gas offers the prospect of a potentially near closed life-cycle loop from production of gas through processing and combustion and back to storage of CO2. A similar life-cycle for coal will at best be able to reduce emissions by around 70%. Gas production typically has a lower local environmental impact than coal production, as does its combustion. Natural gas has fewer impurities, aiding the carbon capture process, while the smaller volumes of CO2 produced per clean MW generated present half the requirement for CO2 transportation and storage. 3.10              This is of particular relevance when considering the availability of CO2 storage. While there is a large theoretical volume of CO2 storage accessible, the current practical reality is that it is a scarce asset. Access to CO2 storage should therefore be prioritized for the highest value applications, not taken up by low-value high-CO2 sources.3.11              In the context of the impact of shale gas extraction on US energy prices, there is great strategic value in advancing the deployment of CCS on gas power generation. A shift from coal to gas reduces emissions significantly, but only with the deployment of CCS would gas have a longer-term sustainable role in the UK or Europe.3.12              With the Peterhead project one of the remaining two projects in the UK Commercialisation Programme, the UK is well-placed to reap the rewards – but current policy as set out in the gas strategy and in the proposals for Emissions Performance Standards bizarrely seeks to remove new waves of gas plant from the need to consider the deployment or retrofit of CCS. 3.13              The UK should instead be setting out a pathway for the retrofit and or deployment of CCS on gas-fired generation from the outset as a means of providing investors with a clearer business case out to 2030 and beyond. At present the position of exempting gas plants from the EPS out to 2045 is incoherent in the context of carbon budgets and the assumption that carbon prices will rise to restrict running hours and / or incentivise CCS. 3.14              There is a need for greater clarity of purpose in government policy to restate the necessary shift from unabated fossil fuels to the widespread deployment of CCS over the coming decades. Given that the Office of CCS is also responsible for policy on fossil fuels, more should have been expected on this over recent years. Instead, DECC has appeared to be seeking to extend the lifetime of old coal plant and encourage new unabated gas (in the face of continued pressure from HM Treasury). Prospects for CCS have been overlooked rather than positioned at the centre of HM Government strategy on fossil fuels.3.15              Similarly, the application of CCS to industrial facilities was only weakly featured in the CCS Roadmap. BIS have recently commissioned analysis on costs, but no clear forward strategy has been identified. The OCCS, meanwhile, has declined to take a proactive role in supporting potential industrial CCS projects as it concentrates on the Commercialisation Programme for electricity generation projects. We are aware of at least one project that could be taken forward rapidly but which seemingly cannot be supported by the UK government due to it not being linked to electricity generation.3.16              While the desire of DECC / OCCS to ensure successful ‘delivery’ after past failures is understandable, the current narrow approach is setting back chances of securing the timely and widespread deployment of CCS in the UK. 

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[4. CCS availability, cost reduction and UK benefits]]]4.1              A range of technologies for CO2 capture are already available, some of which have many decades of commercial application (see for example, the separation of CO2 in gas processing facilities or ammonia production). CO2 transport and storage have also been deployed at commercial scale, particularly when in combination with Enhanced Oil Recovery (CO2-EOR) in North America.4.2              Continued innovation and cost reduction of capture technologies is possible, and will be accelerated by the development of global markets for CCS. The UK will benefit from the development of such markets in a limited way via the presence of manufacturing facilities for the major technology companies.4.3              More importantly, the major initial cost reductions for CCS projects will come from inescapably ‘local’ issues regarding accessibility of CO2 storage and the provision of CO2 transport infrastructure. The findings of the UK’s CCS Cost Reduction Taskforce point to the centrality of risk reduction and economies of scale as a means of reducing project cost and enabling commercial deployment.4.4              It must be remembered that ‘CCS’ is in fact a integrated set of technologies more akin to the infrastructure associated with oil and gas production, processing and distribution, and not a simple bolt-on pollution control instrument. CCS policy therefore needs to consider network solutions for CCS, not simply point-to-point project investment models. We will return to this failing of UK policy making below.4.5              Some policy makers (including HM Treasury) have queried why the UK should invest in CCS now, rather than waiting for cost reductions to occur elsewhere first. The answer lies in the inevitably local nature of CCS deployment. While it may of course be possible to import cheaper CO2 capture technology in future ‘from China’ (to take a frequent example), it is not possible to import geology, nor local geographies for transportation infrastructure. Nor is it possible to radically alter the timetables of current North Sea oil and gas fields experiencing declining production and which would be amenable for use for CO2 storage (either in combination with CO2-EOR or post-production). 4.6              Neither is it possible to avoid the timetables of investment cycles for existing UK industrial production facilities. The logic of carbon pricing is that CO2 will increasingly be considered as a component part of production costs (in addition to the carbon cost of electricity generation), and the pursuit of low-carbon competitiveness will therefore require attention to decarbonise production itself, or face the risk of production capacity re-locating overseas in pursuit of lower costs (e.g. of labour) or where more efficient and lower-emitting plant can be built from scratch. In such a context, the deployment and retrofit of CCS becomes a critical job retention technology for industrial sectors in the UK and Europe including oil refineries, paper works, steelworks, and cement production.4.7              The most significant competitive advantage and economic benefit to the UK from continued and accelerated investment in CCS will therefore be two-fold. Firstly, by enabling the decarbonisation of industrial production and associated electricity generation in ways that add value and reduce system costs overall. Secondly, by providing a home market within which the UK’s engineering expertise can address CCS infrastructure integration challenges, positioning it ready to export this valuable skills and know-how, just as has been achieved by the offshore oil and gas sector.&#xa0;

[[[5. UK and EU misaligned on projects and policy]]]5.1               The UK’s reputation as a policy innovator and political advocate for CCS has been progressively diminished over recent years. The UK should be at the forefront of efforts to improve the CCS policy framework within Europe and globally, both of which would be of immediate practical benefit to the UK. The current absence of proactive engagement on either is resulting in the UK losing its reputation as a leading advocate of CCS.5.2               As the member state best positioned for the deployment of CCS within Europe, the UK’s successes and failures are closely watched by others. Getting it right in the UK matters if CCS is to be deployed more widely in Europe. The stripping back of UK financial support for domestic CCS programmes has negatively impacted on practical momentum, while the de-prioritisation of international CCS efforts has contributed to the hollowing out of previous strategic efforts and forums such as the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum and Clean Energy Ministerial.5.3              On 

[[[projects]]], the failure to secure EU funding from the first round of the NER300 programme was an immense embarrassment, given the leading role the UK played in securing its creation (and delaying its implementation). 5.4              The previous Labour government enacted a CCS levy in Energy Act 2010, stated a commitment to supporting 4 CCS projects, and introduced a policy of ‘no new coal without CCS’. The coalition government in turn initially expressed its intent to make the UK “first choice for investment in CCS”, before rejecting the CCS levy in favour of the Treasury’s Carbon Price Support mechanism, and quietly dropping the commitment to 4 projects.5.5              In the interim, the creation of the EU’s NER300 funding mechanism in 2008-09 enabled multiple UK CCS projects to continue development. In 2010-11 the UK was able to put forward 7 CCS projects for consideration (out of 13 in total from across the EU). 5.6              This positive situation was belatedly complemented by the launch of the UK’s current CCS commercialization programme in early 2012. This again received a number of interesting expressions of interest (including in ‘part-chain’ industrial and infrastructure projects), however only 5 full-chain projects subsequently entered the UK programme – 4 of which were still in the running for NER300 funding.5.7              Unfortunately, the UK was unable to confirm a sufficiently specific selection of projects or the provision of co-funding in time, and the first round of NER300 closed in December 2012 with funding allocated to 23 renewables projects (2 in the UK), but no CCS projects. The only firm choice taken by the UK was to de-select the Don Valley project, which had already received €180m from the EU’s EEPR fund, and which had been top ranked by the European Investment Bank scrutiny process.5.8              More recently, the final 4 projects in the UK competition have been whittled down to 2 preferred projects and 2 reserve projects. All 4 of these projects (and indeed the Don Valley project too) are high quality projects that are located in strategic locations that could set the UK on track for the development of a core CO2 infrastructure to enable wider decarbonisation. Yet only with the announcement of preferred projects did DECC belatedly try to find ways of supporting the continued development of the other projects. This has been too little, too late.5.9              The preferred projects at Peterhead (Gas post-combustion retrofit, Shell and SSE) and White Rose (Coal oxyfuel new build, Alstom, Drax, BOC and National Grid) are set to undertake further detailed Front End Engineering and Design studies, due for completion in mid-2014. Further negotiations would then be undertaken with DECC before project award, with a final decision not expected until early 2015. This is too slow, and the current approach is a recipe for the period 2010-2015 being seen to be five wasted years for CCS in the UK.5.10              The White Rose project is the sole CCS entrant in the second round of the EU NER300 process, and should therefore be guaranteed additional funding support – provided that the UK government is able to provide sufficient clarity to the European Commission as to its willingness to provide its own funding support. Given previous failures it is imperative that the UK is in a position to take timely decisions on co-funding support. We acknowledge that the level of funding to come from the NER300 is an order of magnitude lower, however the principle of a pan-European effort on CCS was one that the UK advocated and should still be seeking to support. The failure of the second round of NER300 would have negative implications for the inclusion of CCS within any similar future funding mechanism, as may be included under efforts to reform the EU ETS.5.11              Given that gas CCS projects are disadvantaged by the EU assessment criteria, the Peterhead project has sensibly decided not to bid for NER300 funding. This has had the positive impact of removing a potential point of indecision from DECC, which would otherwise have had to choose between 2 UK projects for its sole remaining funding slot. 5.12              On 

[[[policy]]], the recently published UK response to the European Commission consultation on CCS failed to take a proactive approach, and failed to support emerging policy options (such as CCS certificates) that could advance CCS on industrial sources of CO2 and unlock the potential of the North Sea as a hub for European CO2 storage. The UK paper instead repeated the unhelpful and simplistic position that CCS certificates would require some form of technology target, and would therefore not be supported. This approach is damaging to the UK’s diplomatic efforts on EU climate policy more broadly, not simply on CCS.5.13              Moreover, it is being increasingly recognised elsewhere in Europe that additional policy measures will be required (at both EU and member state level) to enable the deployment of CCS. The UK should be at the forefront of efforts to accelerate this, but instead has retreated into a limited focus on its own Commercialisation Programme and Electricity Market Reform efforts. 5.14              The UK should, for example, be considering how its proposed Emissions Performance Standard could be improved through the integration of CO2 limits on existing plant in line EU timetables for investment decisions on pollution control equipment. Such an effort would accelerate EU efforts to address the continued operation of existing coal plant, as per the recommendation of the IEA that additional policy measures beyond carbon pricing must be considered.5.15              Similarly, the UK has much to gain from any enhanced funding mechanisms for the development of CO2 infrastructure, storage characterisation and industrial CCS. A combined CCS certificate / infrastructure fund could supplement limited UK funding and provide additional revenue streams for UK projects. Such options should be proactively considered now so that CCS can be positioned as a coherent element of a future EU climate and energy framework out to 2030 and beyond.September 2013&#xa0;