&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[ScienceGrrl]]]

[[[ (WSC049)]]]1. ScienceGrrl is a broad-based, grassroots organisation celebrating and supporting women in STEM. We formed in June 2012 to produce the ScienceGrrl 2013 calendar - a project to showcase a diverse mix of female role models from a range STEM disciplines and sectors. We opened for membership in February 2013 and ScienceGrrl was registered as a company limited by guarantee in June 2013. ScienceGrrl’s activities are led by a committee of volunteers with support from our members and funded through calendar sales, donations, sponsorship, events, merchandising, membership fees and grant awards. We currently have over 200 members and 13 local chapters across the UK. Our chapters provide peer-support for members and opportunities to engage in outreach activities to showcase the real female face of STEM. &#xa0;2. This submission represents input from over 100 people following direct engagement with our members/supporters through workshops and a call for evidence. We also requested exit interview data from a number of sources and received this data from Imperial College London for the period covering 2008-2012. Considering that our membership is largely junior (PhD students, postdocs) and that the pipeline is ‘leakier’ at these stages, our submission focuses on issues relating to this career stage, specifically: relocation, maternity leave and childcare, career support, and recognition and reward of non-research activities.Relocation3. It is well-known that within the pyramid ‘move up or move out’ structure of academic careers, short-term contracts and funding cycles are challenges that contribute to uncertainty. There is also a perceived need to relocate. This pressure is illustrated by comments from a 29 year old female postdoc looking to leave the academic track: “I understand that in order to progress as an academic, it would be necessary to relocate. I have a long-term boyfriend in Kent who is unable to relocate. Within the next 5 years, we plan to buy a house, move in together, and marry. Currently, I’m not willing to live or work more than 2 hours away from him”. Another female lecturer tells us that had she not been successful in gaining her post she would have “left academia as I had reached the point where I could no longer deal with the uncertainty and moving around”. However, issues of stability do not only affect women. One of our male members told us he had “tired of the nomadic lifestyle which had prevented settling down…..living in different places has been fun, but has totally disrupted my personal life in a very negative way. It’s also played havoc with long-term financial stability with regards to pensions and house buying”.4. Perhaps those who make the choice to relocate do so from a position of independence until it impacts upon a need for stability. Depending on individual timelines, this may be seen as incompatible with academic progress. Successful international experience is also perceived as valuable within academia and overseas relocation data may indicate whether there are gender differences in mobility. Imperial College London exit interview data for researchers leaving at grades A-C shows that whilst 19.5% of male leavers chose to move overseas to follow an academic career, women were less likely to do so: 11.9% of female leavers moved abroad for this reason. However, an identical proportion (5.8%) of men and women moved abroad for non-academic employment. It would be interesting to know whether this difference was accounted for by more stable long-term prospects.Maternity leave and childcare5. The years spent working to secure academic independence and a permanent position are also the years many people choose to ‘settle down’ and/or start a family. A number of factors seem to influence whether this decision will be seen as suited to an academic career. During a workshop at Imperial College London (in association with the Imperial College Science Communication Forum), we heard from pregnant postdoctoral researchers that their decision was influenced by the financial position of their partners. There was agreement that “salaries in academic postdocs aren’t enough to support a family”. One of the women was looking to leave academia for this reason; another told us that childcare “will cost about 70% of my post-tax salary. Certainly, if I had another child, I would have to either give up work or move to a more highly paid job”. The group observed that many of the male postdocs with children they knew had partners who earned more. 6. There are inconsistencies in how maternity leave is awarded to PhD students. For example, CRUK defers to the Host Institution but all Research Council funded students “are entitled to take 6 months of maternity leave on full stipend and a further 6 months of unpaid maternity leave”. We heard from one postdoc who was not eligible for contractual maternity pay because she had not been in employment long enough. She reflected that she would have timed her move differently if she had realised this. Another postdoc says she will be “in a position where my baby is due on November 20 and my [3 year] contract finishes on November 30, after which time I will not be eligible for contractual maternity leave.” RCUK guidance GC 9 tries to address this but the researcher believes she is only eligible for statutory maternity pay, not the contractual maternity package she could have expected had she become pregnant earlier in her contract. 7. The University of Leicester Athena SWAN website states that it is “possible to either simply extend the grant while the postdoc is on maternity leave and/or continue the programme by appointing maternity cover (within the original cash limit). &#xa0;STFC/RCUK acknowledged that they perhaps need to make sure that these terms and conditions and financial arrangements are more widely publicised”. Grant extensions require advance written notification from the grant holder to the funding body. This relies on clear knowledge of policies and may be a weak link. We believe that issues around disruption to research due to parental leave, lack of awareness of policies and the fact that these issues are not discussed openly contribute to continued confusion and conscious or unconscious bias. 8. Career breaks are a challenge in academia. The Daphne Jackson Trust says: “Scientists often feel unable to return due to a wide variety of reasons: lack of part-time or flexible posts, difficulties with childcare, unpleasant and outdated working environments, lack of career progression, secretive and unfair recruitment and promotion procedures, to name but a few” and offers valuable career re-entry fellowships to tackle the problem. The Wellcome Trust and British Heart Foundation are examples of other funders offering career re-entry fellowships. 9. ‘Return to work’ policies following parental leave are inconsistent. One member, working within the NHS told us: “I asked to work 3 days a week after my first child was born. This was arranged without any problem”. However, members within academia have spoken about unrealistic expectations that they will return to full time research and teaching responsibilities. Career support: advice, mentors and sponsors10. Another common theme is a lack of active and consistent support regarding career progression. If present, this has been attributed to being “with the right supervisor at the right time” and professional networks:“There has not been a significant amount of support in helping me progress in my career. I have had to go out and create my own opportunities” “My current supervisor does not mentor me in any way. He is not interested in my academic advancement, nor is he interested in developing my skills as a researcher”“I think the lack of a mentor since my PhD has hampered my career progression”“Earlier in my career, my supervisor refused to put me on a paper I had contributed a lot of work to because he wanted to be sole author....lack of support has definitely contributed to my desire to leave academia”We also heard from those who had a mentor/sponsor and the positive impact this has had:“My PhD thesis advisor and postdoc advisor were both very supportive of my career progression providing advice and advertising my work. They were both quite senior figures and their sponsorship no doubt has contributed greatly to my academic success”“I had one mentor in San Diego who restored my faith in science, and showed me that it was possible to do it really well without worrying too much about what the mainstream said you were supposed to be doing”“It would have been great to be able to speak with other women who have 'been there, done that'. By joining ScienceGrrl I am starting to get the opportunity to do that, which has given me confidence that I can start a family and continue to have an active career”11. Another thing that has been consistently raised is the lack of senior women to identify with. ‘Superwoman’ role models are generally seen as intimidating rather than inspiring and our members and supporters would like to see more ordinary women to help make their goals seem achievable. One female Professor puts it like this: “I think that from the outside our lives probably look, to the rising generation of young women, pretty harassed and miserable. That's because they don't see us when we are at home in the middle of the week in our slippers, eating hobnobs and happily writing papers! They only see us when we are in our work clothes, rushing off to meetings and generally looking excessively busy. Who can blame them for thinking "I don't want that" when they don't know that "that" also involves getting to every single school play, being able to go shopping in the middle of the week so as to free up Saturday for a sports event, or whatever else we get to do as flexible academics. We have a bit of a PR problem, I think, and ought to rectify that”. One of our members actively sought mentoring through WISE “but they couldn't find one for me. I was looking for a senior female academic, but apparently they didn't have any on their books. I suspect that lack of mentors is a real problem, and that will partly be because senior academics are already completely crushed by their responsibilities - especially the females, who have to be on committees etc. so that there is at least one female there”.12. Of course, successful mentors and sponsors can be male or female - the important thing being the guiding influence they can provide and the opportunities they can identify and push younger scientists towards. In a highly competitive setting such as academia, having a champion can increase awareness of opportunities and the confidence to go for them. There have been many public discussions about whether women are less likely to push themselves forward for promotion or negotiate than their male colleagues and some companies (e.g. dstl) have changed the way they promote to counter this, allowing supervisors to nominate people rather than waiting for people to nominate themselves. One of our members said: “I was pushed by my boss to move faster and take responsibility before I thought I could - being given opportunities built my confidence”.&#xa0;Recognition and reward for non-research activities13. Another challenge within academia is that non-research skills (e.g. leadership, mentoring, pastoral care, teaching, project/lab management) appear to be largely ignored when it comes to advancing up the pyramid. Considering the impact sponsorship by a senior scientist can have on a rising career, it is worrying that the presence of this support is largely left to chance rather than being embedded into academic culture. We feel that weighting promotions on the basis of wider skills (and including ‘360-degree feedback’) once research calibre has been established would help reward those who contribute to a supportive work culture.14. This also touches on observations our members have made about the type of additional work taken on by women in STEM. It is widely known, but largely unstated, that in addition to pursuing their own research, PhD students and postdocs are expected to undertake laboratory management activities and train students among other duties. Further up the pyramid, administration load and teaching responsibilities are not equally shared. We have encountered much frustration that non-research skills aren’t formally recognised or valued within academia. Anecdotally, our discussions have led us to believe that more women than men take on so-called ‘soft’ responsibilities and that the extra strain they place on ability to progress with research activities may affect career advancement. We have also encountered frustration that lack of formal recognition means it is more difficult to convince other sectors of such capabilities - and this is, after all, the route most people will take. Our members have told us that moving to other sectors has required them to “start again” because there are misconceptions about what being on an academic track entails: “it’s about more than the research itself but no one seems to realise that”.15. In terms of other non-research skills, our members have also felt their public engagement work to be undervalued. Girls and women continue to be underrepresented in STEM, and so promoting diversity and visible female role models (including in the media) is a critical part of inspiring the next generation and expanding the UK STEM skills base. The majority of outreach work is done on a volunteer basis alongside a full time job and other responsibilities. It is not efficient or sustainable to depend on goodwill alone. What can be done to address these challenges?16. There is a prevailing culture of confusion in which options and entitlements around starting a family are not clear or openly discussed. Universities and the HE sector should be doing more to discuss these issues in a positive way, making policy clear to grant holders, staff and students, and policies should be harmonised across the full range of funding bodies. Policies that tackle investment in childcare (operating hours, waiting lists and affordability) are badly needed. In addition, funding opportunities that are exclusively available to those with caring responsibilities, ‘stopping the clock’ on academic age during a caring career break and more late career/reentry fellowships may help reduce competitive disadvantage. 17. We advocate the cultivation of an academic environment that more consistently nurtures rising careers. Support for formal mentoring is one such approach and many institutions have mentoring programmes. However, it is a significant undertaking and should be rewarded and valued as such, perhaps by offering incentives, formal recognition and training. 18. Doctoral Training Centres that help incubate young talent may be an interesting model: a Deputy Programme Director at one such Centre told us that their advantages include “the allocation of staff resources who are committed to deliver a high standards of postgraduate training; peer to peer learning environment; the cohort based teaching and learning; access to a broader audiences through the Centre as an interface between academia, industry and society overall”.  19. Another approach is to ensure that academics who progress to senior positions are not only good scientists but also good leaders and managers, which is not only beneficial for research environments but also productivity. Non-research skills should be formally recognised and taken into account when hiring or selecting people for promotion. Recognition would also place value on the many non-research activities required within academia and support the progression of those moving out of this sector. 20. We also advocate transparency in selection/promotion procedures - and in negotiating pay. Comments from a female Professor support this: “I think the system is very unfair - you can have two equally productive professors, with Professor A could be being paid nearly twice Professor B. Furthermore, because this is all negotiated secretly, Professor B may know nothing about this and think their salary is normal. This isn't hypothetical - I did a professorial pay-productivity review recently (for Athena SWAN) and while pay and productivity generally correlate, there are some notable disparities”. 21. How the flow of money is managed within academia compared to industry is also something we would like to see examined. We have encountered frustration regarding inflexibility in the system, for example a female Fellow told us: “I can see that Universities are stymied by the limitations on how they can spend money and hire people, and by the vast timescales it takes to find money to make new hires. In companies this seems to be easier to fix, because the funding is basically internal. &#xa0;But one of the reasons that Universities are so dreadful at all this is that they don't feel they can do the logical things to solve the problem, because they don't have the money”. 22. We also feel that it is unrealistic to continue telling PhD students and postdocs that an academic track is the only successful way to use their STEM education and training. Retaining talent is important, and investing in a new tier of ‘permanent researchers’ is one approach, but there are many successful paths in addition to academia. We believe that it would be useful to reframe the pipeline to include those who move to other primary and secondary STEM careers. With this in mind, our members have told us that they would value better early careers advice regarding awareness of these opportunities, training in how to compete/succeed in other sectors and to find ways to ensure qualifications and experiences accrued to date were more formally recognised and appreciated by other sectors. 23. We would also like to note that many of these challenges affect both men and women and there is a need to modernise academia for everyone. Closing comments24. ScienceGrrl would be happy to provide further information on the points raised here, to discuss them further with the Committee and to recommend oral witnesses or other specialist sources. September 2013&#xa0; http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/science/funding/terms-conditions/grant-conditions/studentships/ http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/documents/documents/tcfec.pdf http://www2.le.ac.uk/institution/athena-swan/maternity-leave-and-grants/copy_of_maternity-leave-and-grants http://www.daphnejackson.org/