&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[Bryn Jones]]]

[[[ (WSC054)]]]&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]Introduction&#xa0;1.1 I worked for 10 years as a postdoctoral research scientist in astrophysics in British universities. I worked more recently as an academic on short-term contracts for nearly 5 years and was included in the 2008 Research Assessment Exercise. During these times I observed how the career system in British universities affected female (and male) scientists.&#xa0;1.2 As a man, I make comments here on issues affecting women's careers in science within British universities, and emphasise those particular issues where the Committee has requested evidence. I do not here consider STEM careers outside universities.&#xa0;1.3 I contend:   (i)              the academic careers system is fundamentally over-competitive, with large numbers of              scientists chasing a small number of long-term jobs;  (ii)               women suffer disproportionately through the need for junior researchers to have patronage               from established academics to advance their careers; (iii)              there can be no solution to the participation of women in academic science without a              fundamental reform to the research careers system.&#xa0;&#xa0;The academic research careers system and its failures&#xa0;2.1 There have been repeated complaints about the character of the academic research careers system. These were articulated recently by the Science is Vital campaign.&#xa0;2.2 The research careers system is extremely competitive in the sense that large numbers of postdoctoral scientists on fixed-term contracts chase a small number of permanent university positions, mostly permanent academic positions. This is a direct consequence of research councils funding very large numbers of PhD students compared with the number of long-term jobs available. &#xa0;2.3 I estimate that the imbalance in the number of PhD positions to the number of long-term jobs in my academic discipline (astronomy) is about 15 to 1. Consequently, only about 5-10% of people who are awarded PhDs will continue in university research in the long term. All others will have to leave academia for industry, business or the public sector. Some will leave immediately after completing a PhD; others will leave after one, two or three three-year research assistantship positions, or after the expiry of fellowships. Ageism excludes many researchers who do not obtain lectureships by their late 30s from further employment in academic research.&#xa0;2.4 People who attempt to achieve research careers will usually be employed on a number of three-year fixed-term contracts, often moving university (and hence city, even country) to take up new contracts. This uncertain lifestyle is difficult to reconcile with a family life.&#xa0;2.5 The extreme imbalance between the number of early-career researchers employed on short-term contracts and the number of long-term university positions leads to an expectation of career failure for a large majority of researchers. Those researchers who do not obtain permanent lectureships are expected to find employment in business, industry or the public sector, and are expected not to engage in university research again: they are expected to leave universities and most are expected not to be heard of again. Established academics in particular tend to accept that a majority of junior researchers will not progress to a long-term university career.&#xa0;2.6 There is a very strong hierarchy within university research structures, the result of attitudes within universities and research councils, and of research council practice. These make support from established academics of critical importance in the career opportunities available to junior researchers. Practical examples of these hierarchies include:   (i)               Applications for fellowships generally need to be approved by universities, giving university               departments decisive roles in determining which individuals are able to apply for fellowships.               Some research councils, such as the Science and Technology Facilities Council, even apply               strict quotas on the number of applicants individual departments can put forward.   (ii)               Researchers on fixed-term contracts are unable in practice, or in very many cases prohibited,               from applying themselves for research grants, even modest sums for equipment. Some               established academics are willing tosubmit grant applications written by fixed-term staff               under the name of the established academic; many, perhaps most, established academics do               not even do this. &#xa0;2.7 Junior researchers are dependent on the support and patronage of established academics in other ways, including the following.   (i)               PhD students and research assistants are normally granted access to data and to facilities               through established academics. Academics make decisions as to which individuals are given               access to the best data, the best facilities and the best projects.   (ii)               Much competitive research is carried out today within collaborations and teams. Entry into               collaborations is often dependent on nomination by established academics who are already               members. Entry of researchers into collaborations is consequently dependent on established               academics taking positive action to support them.  (iii)               Junior researchers normally require grant holders - established academics - to release funding               for the researchers to travel to conferences at which they might get themselves noticed by               potential future employers.&#xa0;2.8 Consequently, fixed-term research staff have little ability to control their own careers unless they are given active support to do so by established academics. This creates a strong need for support or patronage from established academics to continue a career. &#xa0;2.9 This need for support and patronage can lead to an unconscious bias in favour of individuals similar in character, manner and background to established academics. This can lead to a selection in favour of certain individuals, and a selection against women, ethnic minorities and people from economically disadvantaged backgrounds.&#xa0;2.10 Pushy, loud or articulate individuals are more likely to be noticed by established academics, and consequently may be more likely to receive essential career support. Conversely, junior researchers who are quiet, shy, reticent or polite can be denied opportunities regardless of their abilities as researchers. In my own case, I feel that I, as somebody (and a man) who attempts to be polite at all times, tended to be overlooked for support at times. &#xa0;2.11 Academics frequently assume a standard career trajectory for all researchers. This conventionally involves a PhD, followed by one or two postdoctoral research assistantships, and then a fellowship, with the publication of a few or several research publications at each of these stages. There is little allowance for career paths that do not conform to this pattern, which may include a career break to raise a family. In my own case, time spent on project support reduced my early research publication rate. &#xa0;2.12 Established academics tend to under-appreciate the deficiencies in the academic careers system. In some cases this is because established academics feel that they managed to obtain permanent jobs and therefore assume that the system cannot be too bad. Many others fail to recognise that support that was given to them that proved critical in them getting permanent positions.&#xa0;&#xa0;Factors that particularly affect women&#xa0;3.1 An unconscious bias by academics preferentially to support people like themselves is likely to disadvantage women, given the much greater numbers of male than female academics in many scientific fields. &#xa0;3.2 While it is dangerous to generalise about personality types and gender, it is clear that some characteristics are more common among men than women. An aggressive pushiness may be more common among men than women, which may help some types of men to get essential career support from established academics. &#xa0;3.3 Women may choose to take time out of research to have children. This may leave gaps in their publication records and it may mean they lose their up-to-date knowledge of fast-changing research fields. Consequently, women scientists may find it difficult to return to research after career breaks. &#xa0;3.4 Women are very conscious of the need to start families before their fertility declines with age. Women who do not succeed in obtaining a permanent job before their mid-thirties may feel it necessary to abandon science for more secure employment.&#xa0;3.5 I have witnessed occasional instances of positive discrimination in favour of young women at the time of appointments to lectureships. These actions have helped to lessen gender imbalances among academic staff. However, there does appear to be an element of luck which can disadvantage women who happen not to be in the right place at the right time. &#xa0;3.6 Selecting some women for academic jobs through positive discrimination could lead to an under-performance of these women later in their academic careers. It would also discriminate against more talented women who are not lucky enough to receive such selective support.&#xa0;&#xa0;Necessary reforms &#xa0;4.1 Fundamental reforms to the academic careers system are needed to reduce the disadvantages that affect most researchers and which particularly disadvantage women. These include:    (i)               Changes to lessen the importance of patronage from established academics in developing the               careers of junior researchers.   (ii)               Giving junior researchers greater opportunities to control their own careers.  (iii)               Reducing the extreme imbalance between numbers of people trained to PhD standard and the               number of long-term positions in universities and research institutes.   (iv)               Reducing the influence of ageism in determining the opportunities available to fixed-term               staff.    (v)               Developing a greater acceptance of diversity in the backgrounds of researches and greater               awareness of different career paths, including career breaks to raise families. (vi)               A greater willingness by academics to promote without favouritism the careers of junior               research staff.&#xa0;4.2 Reforms would need dedicated action by research councils, universities, university departments, research groups and individual academics. A much greater awareness is needed at all levels of the failings of the academic careers system and how it disadvantages many researchers, including women, ethnic minorities and people from disadvantaged backgrounds.&#xa0;4.3 Research staff should initiate a new campaigning organisation dedicated to lobbying for improvements to academic research careers, including issues that particularly affect women. The trade union recognised by universities to represent fixed-term staff – the University and College Union – should strongly improve its representation of research staff and attempt to understand  the problems affecting women researchers.&#xa0;4.4 I recommend that the Select Committee on Science and Technology holds a dedicated inquiry into the general issue of academic research careers. &#xa0;&#xa0;Declaration of interests&#xa0;5.1 I am not currently employed in UK science or in any university or by any research council. I do not receive any payment from any university, research council or other scientific organisation. &#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;                Careering Out of Control: A Crisis in the UK Science Profession? Science is Vital, 2011. http://scienceisvital.org.uk/2011/10/06/careering-out-of-control-a-crisis-in-the-uk-science-profession/