&#xa0;

[[[WiSET Submission to the Science and Technology Select Committee Enquiry]]]

[[[ into women in academic STEM careers]]]

[[[.]]]

[[[Executive Summary]]]1. WiSET is based within the Centre for Science education (CSE) at Sheffield Hallam University. We are a longstanding and experienced academic and practitioner team working in the field relating to gender, STEM and education along the whole pipeline.2. The 'leaky pipeline' phenomena is a useful way of identifying pressure points at which to address the shortfall of girls and women taking up and progressing in STEM. But the under-representation of women at higher levels of academia is part of a wider societal problem. The STEM sector has a number of specific issues relating to women that are longstanding and complex. There needs to be a broad, holistic and sustained approach to addressing the issues drawing on work and evidence from recent interventions.3. STEM skills are actively sought by many sectors outside STEM. But as the numbers of women are already low, a macho STEM academic culture will drive more women out when STEM should be encouraging them to stay. The sector needs to change, not the women.4. The higher education sector is fortunate. The ECU Athena SWAN Charter has been built upon sound foundations and is helping to achieve culture change in the institutions that commit to change. Universities need to be encouraged to make themselves accountable and commit to change.5. Government needs to lead a strategy and draw from the evidence it has already. The work of the UKRC (WISE), the Scottish Government investment and the role of the Public Sector Equality duty are all essential parts of a wider approach to change. The Government needs to lead by example.

[[[The Response]]]1. Who we are, what we have done. How does our experience help us contribute to the enquiry?1.1. WiSET aims to encourage women and girls into STEM and the built environment, to increase rates of recruitment, retention and progression of women to help meet the needs of the economy. We work at all stages of the 'pipeline' from schools, colleges, university, in work and we work with all stakeholders and girls and women themselves. 1.2 We have a national reputation for interventions in the field of gender equality and STEM. We started in 1998 and went on to work in partnership with the UK Resource Centre for Women in SET. We work in partnership with many organisations and institutions with an interest in gender and science.1.3 We work at the beginning of the STEM pipeline - so we have experience of how to widen access in science for girls. We understand the complexity of the issues that limit progression for girls and women. We work in our own university to support the Athena SWAN Charter and have experience of supporting change in gender equality in STEMM subjects. SHU was one of the first new universities to receive a Silver Departmental Award. We work with women who have left STEM careers and want to return but find it difficult, so we have understanding of the barriers they face.1.4 Our knowledge and experience built up over fifteen years provides us with a special insight into the concerns of the Select Committee.1.5. We work with girls and women at all stages of the pipeline, so we understand the issues they face and we see them happening. We know how hard it is to tackle bullying within an academic department, we know how hard it is to balance work and family satisfactorily and we know the career disadvantages of working part-time.2. Why do numbers of women in STEM academic careers decline further up the career ladder?2.1 The problems faced by academics reflect the wider societal problems of women's progression in their careers. The lack of representation of women at higher decision-making levels is one in most professions and in public life. The Select Committee needs to draw on wider research about how to address career progression of women. The work recently done by the Women's Business Council is very relevant and needs to be utilised for this review.2.2. Having acknowledged the general problems in the UK, the nature of academia and STEM subjects do in themselves present additional barriers to women that are experienced in many other countries as well as the UK.2.3 Academia 2.3.1 The competitive nature of academia can be alienating to women (and men). The focus on personal promotion of one self above others, leads towards a 'macho' and secretive work culture that discriminates against women. The pernicious long-hours culture that exists within higher education in teaching and research, can prevent women from even entering the race for promotion.2.3.2 Promotion procedures often lack transparency or appear to be managed unfairly, with 'the old boys' network' operating to exclude women. 2.3.3 There have been a number of research studies of the position of women in academia and of course, the Equality Challenge Unit (ECU) will supply detailed information.2.4 STEM2.4.1 The initial low numbers of women in some STEM subjects (physical sciences, maths, computer science, built environment) immediately limits the number of role models or visible women further up the career ladder. But even in subjects where numbers are high initially, for instance biological sciences, the numbers decline quickly as you mount the career ladder.2.4.2 The insecurity of research contracts has been long recognised and the work following the Roberts' Review by the Research Councils and interventions and research commissioned by the UK Resource Centre for Women in SET (UKRC) has gone a long way to addressing understanding of the problems overall. This can be connected to women who have partners with better pay, or as the need to manage work alongside family responsibilities (which remain largely the role of women)..2.4.3 The experiences of STEM female researchers and students has been explored by the RSC and the UKRC which found that while male and female students disliked the work culture, the males tended to endure it, hoping for better times ahead, while female researchers left STEM. I remember a female student who confirmed this experience. She loved her first degree in chemistry, did well and started a PhD at another university, but had a dreadful experience and was bullied by her supervisor. She completed her PhD but then immediately moved to teaching chemistry because of her experience.2.4.4 The paucity of women available to participate in STEM recruitment panels and on committees can cause overload to the few who are there or just reinforce the perception that women do not progress. STEM Departments are not brave enough to take positive action and think creatively to address these problems.3. When women leave academia, what careers do they transition to? What are the consequences of scientifically trained women applying their skills in different employment sectors? 3.1 This section of the 'leaky pipeline' is another significant point that should be taken seriously. Of course the benefit to other sectors employing women with STEM qualifications is well referenced. STEM skills such as project management and analytical skills are all appreciated in other sectors.3.2 Research shows that women who leave STEM will often move to sectors where employment is more flexible (public sector), where conditions and terms are more family friendly (for instance teaching).3.3. Women who leave STEM to take a career break experience particular problems in returning to STEM. Whilst the Research Councils have promoted a range of measures to address the inequality faced by women in publications records because of starting a family for instance, these issues of unfair comparison against those (usually men) who do not take up a family career break still remain.3.4. The women we have supported to return to STEM are usually working in low pay jobs or they are well over qualified for the role they take up. This is sometimes due to confidence levels being low after being out of work or STEM, but it is often also because they sacrifice their career aspirations for their partner - to follow them in their promotion or to take up family caring duties. While there are companies that actively take on STEM couples (Schlumberger and Volvo for instance) and manage this in a positive way we have little experience of doing this in academia. There are dual careers, but they are rarely actively planned and encouraged.4. What should universities and the higher education sector do to retain women graduates and PhD students in academic careers? Are there examples of good practice?4.1 The higher education sector could learn from the experience of some high profile STEM companies that take gender equality seriously. Through the UKRC schemes to badge gender equality there are a number of case studies that could be drawn on.4.2 The Athena SWAN Charter scheme members and Award holders have a wide range of good practice to draw on. The Athena SWAN Charter, previously funded through the UKRC and now owned by the ECU is a well regarded strong example of how the Higher Education sector has begun to take notice of gender equality. 4.3 The collection of data and data monitoring is the foundation upon which gender equality and change to culture can be founded in STEM higher education. All universities should maintain disaggregated data. Ideas for culture change and practice to change masculine and macho cultures within higher education are not simple. 4.4. The nuances between different STEM subjects' needs and problems (for instance - psychology and engineering have very different cultures), the differences between parts of the higher education sector (traditional Russell Group and new universities), are all taken account of within Athena SWAN. While the driver linked to funding also applies an additional motive to Vice Chancellors who feel they have no need to do more.5. What role should the Government have in encouraging the retention of women in academic STEM careers?5.1 The Government should set an example of gender equality in its own STEM institutions. We would suggest that many government led groups, committees and public bodies within STEM do not have a sufficient representation of women, nor do they have a policy of promoting gender equality to address the issue. 5.2 The Scottish Government have shown the way for women in STEM academia. Their implementation of and investment in the Tapping the Talents recommendations through the Scottish resource Centre and the Institutions is to be applauded. A central role in coordination needs to be a long term strategy. The UK Government should lead a similar strategy for the UK drawing on the STEM professional institutions and stakeholders. The curtailing of the central role of the UKRC was too soon for mainstreaming.5.3. WiSET were involved with work to improve gender equality in public bodies and worked with the Cabinet Office and the Commissioner to introduce mentoring, improve recruitment practice and promote vacancies to women (as part of the UKRC brief). This has ended and should be reintroduced in order to practice what is being required of others.5.4 The Government need to continue to support the Public Sector Equality Duty if the excellent progress made by the Research Councils, RCUK and the ECU is to be continued. Without this support, the position of women in STEM academia is likely to be worsened.5.5 The Government should look for research evidence beyond this current Parliament. The short period of public investment in women in science, engineering and technology since the Roberts Report and the Greenfield Report have produced a significant body of evidence that we know can bring success. Government do not need to reinvent the wheel, but build on the knowledge and success we (WiSET) and others (WISE, WES) already have.

[[[Contact details]]]Dr Pat Morton, WiSET TeamCentre for Science Education, Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield S1 1WBemail: p.m.morton@shu.ac.uk Tel: 0114 225 4695www.wiset.org.uk 5&#xa0; http://womensbusinesscouncil.dcms.gov.uk/  http://www.vitae.ac.uk/policy-practice/1685/Roberts-recommendations.html&#xa0; http://www.rsc.org/images/womensretention_tcm18-139215.pdf &#xa0; https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/32378/11-770-stem-graduates-in-non-stem-jobs-executive-summary.pdf  http://oro.open.ac.uk/19189/  http://www.mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk/documents/equality/GPGworkplaceculture.pdf  http://www.royalsoced.org.uk/cms/files/advice-papers/inquiry/women_in_stem/tapping_talents.pdf 