&#xa0;&#xa0;Written evidence from Eddie Gerrard (TIC 076)The purpose of this short report is to bring to the attention of the Transport Committee the real difficulties that are being experienced in the Broadwindsor group of parishes, the possible solutions and the consequences if there are no solutions taken up.My name is Eddie Gerrard, This year I stood in the County Council Elections, in the Beaminster area. In doing so I visited over 1,300 homes, gaining a great deal of information and many ideas. My specific comments relate to Drimpton and Greenham, with further general comments about the Beaminster area, in West Dorset.  It consists of a collection of villages, hamlets, and farms, lying on the borders of Somerset and Devon, roughly bounded by the rivers Synderford and Axe. Its landscape is one which all would recognise as quintessentially traditional England.  A patchwork of hedgerows, fields, lanes, villages and farms, deep valleys and rounded hills, with a distant view of the sea from its highest places.  The parish is within close reach of the historic market towns of Beaminster, Bridport, and Crewkerne.  In 2012, the time the Parish Plan was produced there were just over 1,300 residents.  At the time of writing the report there were about 30 children below the age of 4 and 30 men and women over the age of 90 years. The Broadwindsor Parishes are made up of Broadwindsor which includes Drimpton, and Burstock which includes blackdown and Seaborough. One of the major issues that people raised on the doorsteps was public transport or to be more precise the lack of it.

[[[What we have at present]]]Buses     No 47  Bridport – Yeovil.               No 40 Broadwindsor – Bridport               No 42 Drimpton – Bridport               No. 204 Thorncombe – YeovilTrain service  Exeter - London

[[[The No. 47.]]]    There are four buses a day, finishing service at 15.45.  The route includes Broadwindsor. It does not include Drimpton and Greenham. The distance is just 2 miles from Broadwindor to Drimpton.

[[[The No. 40.]]]    There are 12 buses a day, finishing at 18.08. The route does not include Drimpton or Greenham. 

[[[The No 42.]]]    Drimpton – Bridport There are two buses on Wednesday and 2 buses on Saturday. 

[[[The No 204.]]]   This bus runs each day departing Drimpton about 10.30  and returning approx. 15.00.

[[[The train service]]] from Crewkerne is scheduled on an hourly basis.The buses that serve the area are provided by Damory and Stage coach. The train which runs from Exeter to London is also provided by Stage coach.  I have been campaigning now for more than 6 months to get back the 

[[[No. 99    Chard – Merriott]]] calling at Drimpton and Greenham.  This bus was prevented from coming into Greenham and Drimpton but still exists as a bus service serving Chard and Merriott. There are 12 buses a day the last service runs at 19.40 Information from the Parish Plan states that:Just over 40% of households in the Broadwindsor Parishes have at least one person who would like to use public transport. One of the big issues in my campaign was to get the bus reinstated for Greenham and Drimpton residents. (1)  

[[[Communications to try and get the 99 bus service to return to Greenham and Drimpton. ]]]Letter dated 2nd January 2013Mr Williams set out his reasons why the No. 99 bus service was withdrawn. He states “The Chard to Yeovil route does not carry enough passengers to be self- sustaining.”  He goes on to say that Somerset County Council, “decided not to divert the service into Drimpton because Drimpton is within Dorset, and therefore the responsibility of Dorset County Council to cover.” (2)The implications of this letter suggest the following:A. The bus company have decided it is not economic to run the service through Greenham and Drimpton. One lady told me that a bus driver that works for the company told her that it was not getting enough people using it. B. The Somerset County Council do not feel obliged to offer a service which goes into Dorset.Point A does not make sense.  The bus stops short of the village and travels along the road that links Lyme Regis with Crewkerne. There are 3 farms and 4 houses along the two mile stretch. If the bus was to come into Drimpton it would still travel 2 miles before linking up with Clapton as it does now. The difference is some 200 dwellings.  There are a substantial minority of citizens in Drimpton and Greenham who are over the age of 70 years. Many of them need to visit their doctor in Crewkerne. To do so, if they do not drive a car, they have to pay a taxi company to take them at a cost. Letter dated 28th March 2013In response to my letter, accompanied by a photograph of a number of residents who relied on the service, Mr Williams made two points. (4)A. Overcome the political difficulty of Somerset Tax payers funding a service for Dorset residents”.B. Persuade Somerset and Dorset County Councils to provide funds …..”The implicationsI sought to use the freedom of information act to ascertain if indeed Dorset had ever paid for the service to enter the Dorset area. The answer was no. I have been in constant communication with an officer working for the Somerset County Council. More details to follow. Email dated 4th April 2013I wrote to a Mrs Nicholson at Somerset County Council explaining how difficult it was to get the bus company and the two councils to get together to discuss putting the service back on in Drimpton. She passed my comments onto the Transport Department. (5)Email undatedMr J Perrett responded from the Transport Department. He commented with the following statements: “The reason the service was unable to serve Drimpton is due to the increased size of the vehicles on service 99….” Mr Perrett also stated,” Dorset Council has never provided any funding for the 90 or current 99 bus service. (6)The implicationsI went onto Google Earth and got a photo-shot of the corner that the bus has to negotiate. I sent it to Mr Perrett inviting him to come to Drimpton. I pointed out that there is sufficient space for the bus to turn comfortably. In fact in the Parish Plan there is a photograph of the very bus that is not able to get around the corner. The bus is just leaving Drimpton. This was taken before the bus was axed. This does seem to be a sticking point between the two councils. However when I spoke with elected councillors I was told that there is an official line and an unofficial line. It was even suggested at one time Dorset County Council believed Drimpton to be in Somerset and therefore not the responsibility of the Dorset County Council.Eamail undatedA final email from Mr Perrett made it clear that the council were looking for two things to happen.He states “If the current 99 vehicles could be operated through Drimpton (presumably enabled by some highway works?)”  He also said, “provided this diversion could be accommodated within the timetable as we would want to maintain an hourly daytime service then we would be happy to reconsider.” (7)At this point I realized I was being given the run-around. No one person was ever going to say you cannot have the service back again. However they were intent on throwing up one problem after the other. The first statement in regards to the need for highway works could be resolved by a Council representative attending Drimpton to confirm my findings as shown on the Google Earth photo-shot. The second point goes back to what I keep on saying. If the bus was to return to the village it would be travelling exactly the same number of miles as it does now, without entering the village. (2 miles)The trainThis is a hearsay account provided by one of the persons working at Crewkerne station. It was stated that stage-coach have told the staff that if they do not have at least requests for 12 tickets a day they will lose their jobs.  The building will be closed and all passengers will not be able to make use of the waiting room nor will they be able to raise any questions as to why, when or how the trains are functioning. The company are encouraging the staff to get as many people as possible to either use the ticket machine at the door or go on line. They are doing so without letting the general public know what the ultimate plan is. The service is every hour from Exeter to London. 

[[[Short term solutions]]]

[[[1.  Extend the services of the Nos. 40, 42 and 47 to take in Drimpton.  It is a very practical solution as the distance from Broadwind]]]

[[[sor to Drimpton is just 2 miles.]]] (8)No. 40 instead of starting and finishing at Broadwindsor. It could start at Drimpton. This would add some three or four minutes to the journey time.No. 42  A daily service could be providedNo. 47. The bus could be directed to come to Drimpton.  This would involve the bus being redirected to go through Little Windsor and on to Mosterton where it goes at present. This would add some ten minutes onto the bus journey. No. 99. Bring the service back into Greenham and Drimpton.The residents of the area were very forthcoming in their thoughts about what should be done. (9)

[[[Long term proposal]]]A plan which brings a bus from Yeovil to all the various villages, arriving in Bridport. It would take a circular route so that it could take in as many of the villages as is practicable. The bus would be planned to run every hour. It would be linked to Yeovil, Crewkerne and Axminster Rail stations. (10)

[[[The consequences of not implementing the short and long term plan. ]]]When visiting people in the villages of Drimpton, Greenham and Stoke Abbott, I was informed as to why it is that people are looking to sell their properties. The suggestions given are:1. No shopping facilities2. No public transport3. Cost of purchasing housesOne of the villages has more than 50% of the homes either classed as second homes or to-let. When houses are sold in Drimpton and the surrounding villages they are often bought by those who believe it is rather nice to have a second home in the Dorset Country-side near to the sea. They can come during the holiday season, leaving the properties empty for most of the year. Those properties that are rented often have people who work in the area and return home at week-ends.The Government needs to have a plan to stop the rural villages from dying. Public Transport is the lifeline. People in Drimpton either go to Crewkerne or to Bridport to shop. Crewkerne is 3.5 miles away and Bridport is 10 miles away. Broadwindsor has managed to open a very small venture selling basic foods in the last couple of months. &#xa0;1. Parish Plan report 2012.2. Letter dated 2nd January from stagecoach South West.3. Voluntary car scheme.4. Letter dated 28th March 20135.  Email dated 4th April 20136. Email undated 7. Email undated8. All the various bus timetables9. Notes taken whilst canvassing.10. A new bus route plan The evidence for the above is available should the committee wish to see it. I just wanted to send a footnote to the short report that I sent about Drimpton in Dorset.&#xa0; Since the report has been written the buses that did run in Drimpton have been reduced to one bus only and that goes from Drimpton to Bridport on a Wednesday only. The Purchase of advance rail tickets from the station office have been increased by 11% to encourage people to use the internet. I imagine the same rule still applies, that is if the station office sells less than 12 tickets a day it will be closed. September 2013&#xa0;