&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[The Institute of Marine Engineering, Science &amp; Technology (IMarEST)]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[(WSC080)]]]1. Executive Summary1.1 The losses known as the ‘leaky pipeline’ are not usually the result of women choosing not to progress their careers. Those who wish to succeed will do so. However, this requires a supportive employer and the willingness for an employer to offer women the opportunity to progress.1. 2 The issues facing women in STEM careers are not necessarily specific to STEM. Many of the issues apply to women across all careers and are related to work life balance and the consequences of having a family.1.3 There are specificities in a career in marine STEM that make it even harder for women to succeed compared to other STEM careers. These include disproportionately low numbers of women in all roles and the additional challenges of working offshore or at sea.1.4 Role models in STEM are vital. These role models must be carefully selected. There is a perception that many of the role models in Marine STEM have got to high level positions by compromising; by not having a family or by becoming “one of the boys” having the opposite effect.2. Introduction2. 1 The IMarEST is the international professional body and learned society for all marine professionals, a registered charity and the first Institute to bring together marine engineers, scientists and technologists into one international multi-disciplinary professional body.2.2 IMarEST is the largest marine organisation of its kind with a worldwide membership based in over 100 countries and provides grades of membership for everyone, from those seeking to become chartered or gain other Professional Recognition, to those just starting out in their careers or studying in education.2.3 The IMarEST is submitting this response to the select committee on behalf of its membership, in particular its female members. The IMarEST specifically requested input from female members by a direct email request but also welcomed comments from male members with the opportunity to contribute made through the IMarEST website.  Members were specifically asked to answer the questions from a Marine STEM perspective addressing the additional challenges facing women in the workplace associated with working offshore and at sea.2.4 The IMarEST currently has 427 female members comprising just over 3% of the total membership. Only 1.5% of members registered as Chartered Engineer (CEng) through the IMarEST are women. However, around 35% of those registered as Chartered Scientist (CSci) through the IMarEST are women (consistent with other Science Council licenced bodies). This implies the issues facing women in marine engineering are even more pronounced than in marine science and technology.   2.5 Although they are no figures available on the total numbers of women working in the UK in marine STEM the numbers are assumed to be low (particularly at middle to senior management levels) given global trends.  According to the International Transport Workers' Federation (ITF) women make up only an estimated 2% (23,000 individuals) of the world's maritime workforce. Women seafarers work mainly in the cruise and ferries sector, often for Flags of Convenience (FOC) vessels which means they are subject to the labour laws (or lack of) of the country to which the ship is registered. The ITF report that these are among the worst paid and least protected of all jobs at sea. Women also tend to be younger, and fewer are officers than their male crew mates. The ITF report that the low number of women employed means that it is inevitable that discrimination and harassment will occur.2.6 In Marine Science the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO (IOC of UNESCO) reported that around 25% of representatives (comprised of senior figures in Ocean Sciences in the UN member states) at its recent General Assembly were women. The commission itself have a female Executive Secretary and a secretariat of 30% female. However, this number drops to 9% if only the technical secretariat staff are considered (i.e. those actively working in STEM roles)2.7 Professional membership bodies, particularly those in engineering have long been seen as Gentlemen’s clubs. In accordance with guidelines being issued by organisations such as Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) and the Royal Society of Edinburgh institutes such as the IMarEST are examining the way they recruit and retain female members and support them through their careers. This is being done in hand with other initiatives such as the International Maritime Organizations “Women at the Helm” and the IOC’s proposed “Network of Women”.2.8 IMarEST members who responded to the call for evidence are at different stages in their careers from students through to managing directors. They are employed across marine engineering, science and technology in the public, private and academic sectors. Most are based in the UK but some are based overseas or have experience in working overseas. There was an equal split in response between those members who have children and those who do not. The evidence provided is largely anecdotal as no formal studies have been carried out.3. Why do numbers of women in STEM academic careers decline further up the career ladder?3.1 Balancing a family with a work life is seen as the biggest cause of this decline.  Some women have no choice but to permanently leave to bring up their families.  There are often fewer opportunities for STEM jobs to be carried out as part-time roles and/or to allow flexible working arrangement for those women who want to return after maternity leave. This was perceived to be more of a factor in academia than in the public of private sector where the metrics used to judge success in academia are challenging.  Being less able to travel for work because of family commitments can seriously hamper career progression. This is particularly relevant in marine science when scientific research cruises may be days, weeks or even months in duration.  Presenting at conferences (normally overseas) and working in collaborative projects are near impossible for women with young children and opportunities for informal networking with peers are missed. Senior academics and managers want to be able to send their staff to events to raise their organisation’s profile and will be reluctant to employ women who can’t travel for extended periods.  In addition, the temporary/short term funding model for research gives very little security, which is, again, non-conducive to starting a family. With the focus on high output of high-quality journal papers as the measure of success (of individuals and universities) this also puts extra pressure on women who take time out for family commitments.3.2 The culture of academia was questioned and those members who worked in academia, particularly overseas, reported that most senior academics are seen to work evenings and weekends and most would not take anywhere near their annual leave allowance.  For woman who have, or are wanting to have a family, this culture makes it extremely difficult to stay in academia.  3.3 Members commented that the academic environment is often aggressive, without offering compensation in terms of job satisfaction. There is a general belief that individuals are working against one another and constructive criticism can be harsh and a demonstration of ‘one-upmanship’. This contributes to a feeling that part time working and parental leave is frowned upon and will compromise a woman’s career.3.4 The hierarchy is very male dominated and perceived as unsympathetic to young females entering academia.  There is a lack of female role models. On the occasions when female supervisors were experienced, it did not seem that these women were particularly interested in supporting other women in STEM, giving the impression that incoming female students and post-docs were a threat, and treating them with hostility. In many cases men were seen as better role models within academia. However, there is a lack of mentoring level for women that men typically receive, both formally and informally. This may be because there is some stigma against senior men associating with junior women (either real or perceived).3.5 Statistically, successful women are more like to be in a dual career couple, and the challenges inherent within this are more likely to result in the woman rather than the man tailoring back their work with mothers normally the primary care giver. Correspondence in Nature (http://www.nature.com/ngeo/journal/v4/n4/pdf/ngeo1113.pdf) supports this within the field of physical oceanography, where the women to men ratio is decreased higher up the academic ladder in the US. What is most worrying is that the women/male ratio has decreased in the last 20/30 years or so and the report concludes that&#xa0;“First, family relationships affect women’s academic careers more than men’s. Academic women typically have a spouse employed full time, and women with children are less likely to enter the tenure track than men” 3.6 Academic careers frequently require people to move across countries or continents, and women, who are more likely to be in dual career couples, are therefore more likely to be penalised by this, as they are statistically more likely to be earning less than their male counterpart and may also have additional childcare responsibilities. If couples wish to stay together geographically, it is statistically more likely that the women’s career will suffer, rather than the man’s.3.7 There is evidence in an unconscious bias in job promotion/hiring. A study in PNAS (Moss Racusin et al., 2012, http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2012/09/14/1211286109#aff-1) showed that both men and women research scientists showed bias in favouring male applications over female ones (only name changed). The sexism exhibited was unconscious, as scientists would give other reasoning for their decision. We need more awareness of this, so that a conscious effort can be made to overcome any such bias; obviously there are academics who would want to change this, if only they knew they were doing it!3.8 Women often undervalue their ability and their academic potential.  It is common to hear from women with an academic background that they didn’t feel they were ‘good’ at it.3.9 Academia still suffers from an image problem – young, female graduates do not perceive academia as a profession.  It continues to be seen as a continuation of the student lifestyle, descending into the wearing of knitted tank tops and an ever diminishing range of focus. 3.10 Finally, there were those members who simply chose to leave academia for reasons unrelated to gender. They simply did not wish to follow an academic career and wished to take a job in industry where the knowledge was applied more directly. Additionally, academic careers are unlikely to offer the same financial rewards as working in industry at a senior level. Depending on the industry you work in,&#xa0;benefits such as promotion, bonuses, recognition from your client(s), opportunities for CPD may happen in faster timelines than in academia. Women in particular may feel they want this faster route especially if they are planning to have a break to have a family.4. When women leave academia, what careers do they transition into? What are the consequences of scientifically trained women applying their skills in different employment sectors?4.1 All those responding to the call for evidence were still employed in STEM careers within the marine sector (oil and gas majors, RN, shipping companies and consultancies for example).  Many reported they found resistance to women doing engineering and providing scientific advice in the maritime sector and offshore where it is still a male dominated society.&#xa0; Going into managerial aspects of work and became a project manager rather than a scientific specialist was seen as an only option for career progression.4.2 The consequences of employing women in different, i.e. "non-typical" sectors e.g. shipyards is positive in all directions. It is good for the traditional men to meet intelligent women. It is character building for the intelligent women to meet traditional men. It is beneficial for the industry to draw employees from a wider pool of humanity.4.3 The same problem occurs for women progressing up the career ladder in industry as in academia in that it tends to happen at the same time as they will wish to start a family. Most higher-tier jobs require full time working particularly if it involves managing junior staff.  Even if a part time, flexible working pattern can be established this often means women simply work longer, non-contracted hours in order to complete what is likely to be a similar workload to someone working full time. If not already employed by a supportive employer when starting a family, part time, flexible opportunities are difficult to find.4.4 Most engineers work in the private sector, where there is very still very little precedence of part time working patterns, particularly in the higher tiers. Public sector employers (e.g. the NHS and Education Boards) are more able to cope with part time working patterns, hence one of the reasons why female doctors and senior teachers are much more prevalent than female engineers.&#xa0;4.5 The perception is that if a woman takes time out of her job when her children are young she will find it difficult to progress to a higher grade when she returns. She will find it easier and more "flexible" to remain at that grade. Management are happy to have a talented woman in a medium grade position and will accommodate her needs for occasional sports day / parent teacher meeting and for non-standard hours so long as she stays in that position. They will not, typically, however, consider her for boardroom positions. The industry therefore loses the benefits of that woman's scientific training, experience and ability when recruiting to its top positions. Eventually the woman will get tired of remaining at the same grade and will be lost to the industry completely.4.6 Some of the more senior members who responded to the consultation commented that between 20 and 30 years ago there was a lot more discrimination. Although positive steps have been made there is a legacy that far less women in their 50s have spent the past 30 years working their way up the career ladder as men, so there are not many available in senior positions. Although there may be many more young women around now at lower levels, they do not tend to have any women in the chain of command above them. When they look upwards, what do they see – an all-male line. Many have no female role models in their company. They get discouraged, and leave to join a company with a better track record for promoting women.4.7 Within the maritime and offshore sector there are perceived excuses for discrimination. For example, on offshore platforms there are often no female toilets and often only communal showers. Men regard offshore platforms as a male preserve where they can carry out activities that are not acceptable in mixed gender employment. In addition, many offshore platforms do not have single rooms. Accommodation is very tight and beds cannot afford to be left empty. Some companies get around it by only employing women in even numbers. (There are often female catering and cleaning staff, which the female engineers can be paired with). Others pair a woman with a man who is on a different shift, so that they are never in the cabin at the same time. Others use it as an excuse not to take women at all. 4.8 In the maritime sector there are very few females in the senior positions, both on board ship and ashore. One of the better shipping companies, who offer opportunities to young female cadets, still only have 1 female chief engineer on their fleet of ships and no female captains. Ashore there are very few female Superintendents and women appear mostly in personnel and human resources roles.4.9 The maritime sector differs hugely to most other industries in that it requires workers to work away from home for extended periods which does not lend itself kindly to raising children. There is not a lot that shipping companies can do about this. However, they should offer other opportunities within the company so that while a woman raises her family she may be able to work in a shore based role and should be given every opportunity to do so, such as relocation, etc. - which is not uncommon in other shore based industries.&#xa0;4.10 All seafarers, not just women have been impacted by Government policy for example the removal of seafarer’s tax to name the most obvious.4.11 The seagoing commitment of all RN personnel was also raised as an issue and there was no desire to see a return to when women were on a separate 'non sea going' tier. However, what is needed are more options.&#xa0; A credible alternative to 'stay and go to sea' or 'have a child and leave' choice that currently exists.&#xa0; This choice is the clearest and most obvious reason for the stark paucity of females in senior positions in the RN. Additionally, if STEM qualified RN personnel leave to find more family friendly employment there are few, if any, opportunities to start a second career in the STEM employment sector that are willing or open to either part time or sufficiently flexible working patterns.&#xa0; It is too easy for employers to find similarly qualified men without the working time restriction.4.12 Finally, there was comment that women are in a similar position to men in this instance. With the current economic situation, many graduates choose careers based on whatever they can get rather than what they might prefer. More females appear to go into teaching roles although many have been forced to leave the science sector due to a lack of jobs. The jobs available often require previous experience which is difficult to obtain when no one is willing to employ you in the first place. Because of this, some women may end up in the retail or care industry which is more female dominated.&#xa0;5. What should universities and the higher education sector do to retain women graduates and PhD students in academic careers? Are there examples of good practice?5.1 Universities need to demonstrate that they do not discriminate against women who want both a career and a family.  The men in these professions tend to have both, so women should be afforded the same opportunity.  A zero tolerance policy of sexism should be instigated and well publicised within academic centres.5.2 Anti-sexism training/guidance should be conducted/issued amongst the (predominantly male) professors in the position of supervising female students. Awareness of promotion/hiring bias should also be considered. Female professors should be encouraged to act as role models for women entering academia, and actively support other women.5.3 Institutions should give greater precedence to the work of women academics, championing contributions from the early phases of academia, and providing the opportunity for female academics to discuss and raise issues they face on an annual basis with the board of directors. Women should be directly encouraged to apply for more senior roles within institutions.  Institutions should ensure that women are directly targeted for internal vacancies.5.4 A team oriented approach should be encouraged in order to eliminate aggressive competition amongst research staff.5.5 Good mentoring through the PhD (in addition to academic supervision) would be a key way to improve retention of women, as whether an individual has a mentor dictates likelihood of success in science. This helps support young women in the field and helps to give incentive to their own research. One major incentive is for people to understand the job prospects in their chosen field, and having good mentoring is very important in this.5.6 Provision of cost-effective childcare for PhD students and scientists, as well as enforcing provision of flexible working. Currently it seems to be that a student or early scientist’s working arrangements are dictated mostly by their direct supervisor. If a supervisor is not understanding with regards to the extra commitments that family brings, this may well discourage women from staying in the field. &#xa0;6. What role should the Government have in encouraging the retention of women in academic STEM careers?6.1 Specific events to attract women into the governmental research sectors can help, where women can talk and network with other women (and men) to gain insight into working in government STEM departments. 6.2 Provision of facilities for cost-effective childcare and flexible working are key to enabling women to co-manage a career with family commitments. Government can play a role in helping to change attitudes towards those who have family commitments, as lack of understanding helps force out women from the sector. 6.3 To boost women numbers into the sector initially, financial incentives to have certain percentages of women at each level could be offered to STEM sectors that perform poorly currently6.4 Men have no idea about the type of prejudice and difficulties women in STEM (and other industries) face. Often men just don’t know about the issues women face having never experienced them and awareness raising is crucial.6.5 Promote more women into positions of power and responsibility.  Seeing role models encourages women to actively advance their own careers. Compulsory targets of the percentage of women in senior management and on Boards (e.g. 40%) should be set and there needs to be recognition and reward of women in successful STEM careers, e.g. Honours List6.6 Train science &amp; technology teachers (especially male teachers) in high schools to be consciously gender-equal in lessons, in the way opportunities are given for girls to give oral answers to whole-class questions and in opportunities for girls to lead in practical sessions6.7 Legislation is required to ensure that women taking time out of work for child-bearing have their careers protected – we should not see childbirth as detrimental to a woman’s career but be thankful that well-educated women are willing to pursue motherhood in a society that tends to deride their choices.6.8 Free, universal childcare should be reinstated.6.9 In recruitment, where many male applicants are received and few women per vacancy, there should be a legal obligation on the employer to offer appropriate support (such as additional training) that would bring a female candidate to the required level of competence, in order to avoid female candidates dropping out of the process where levels of experience resulting from career breaks for family reasons look reduced in comparison with male applicants. Similarly, women who reach the shortlist for a vacancy should be entitled to a trial period in the role, rather than ejected on the grounds that experience is reduced in comparison to male applicants.6.10 Retention of women in STEM careers, both academic and industrial, will fall as a result of increased university fees at BSc level.  Women may not see a return on their investment in university education if they choose to pursue a career in academic STEM and a family, or re-enter academic STEM after a period in industry or the public sector. A reduction in fees, or a bonus/tax break in future for women who return to STEM careers, should therefore be considered as a form of repatriation for women entering STEM and taking on this amount risk. September 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;