&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from West Somerset Council (TIC 087)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]1              How do Government and local authorities identify demand for passenger transport in isolated communities?&#xa0;In West Somerset, Somerset County Council (SCC) has the responsibility for public transport and the Local Transport Plan.  West Somerset Council (WSC) has close links with our parish/town councils and their concerns are relayed to SCC via our district council Lead Member for the Environment and the SCC councillor (who is also a WSC district councillor), who both sit on the SCC Transport Forum.&#xa0;A Voluntary Car Scheme Partnership exists in the district which is attended by SCC and local community transport providers.  This group feeds into Transport in Somerset Community Transport Forum meetings twice a year.&#xa0;2              To what extent are the needs of different groups of passengers taken into account in determining the provision of public transport to isolated communities?&#xa0;West Somerset district is spread over 740 square kilometres with 0.45 people per hectare making the area one of the most sparsely populated in the country.  Rural residents have an increased pressure as they have to travel further for services plus challenges with regard to accessibility by road to key services and employment centres, especially via foot and public transport.  More than one in five people in West Somerset live beyond the ‘reasonable’ limit for accessing key services via public transport, with the exception of hospitals and primary schools.  Only 26% of residents live where they can either walk or get public transport to access their local town centre. &#xa0;Young people find it difficult to access evening employment, studies or social activities as there is limited public transport often finishing to early.  Many older people who do not have their own transport rely on community transport to take them to and from hospital appointments, though they struggle to attend any social functions due to the lack of volunteer drivers for the community car schemes.  Accessible Transport West (ATWest) provides a minibus service which can accommodate people with wheelchairs and other physical needs of clients.&#xa0;3               What are the main challenges associated with providing better and more consistent bus and rail services to isolated communities?  How can these challenges be overcome?&#xa0;There are no mainline rail links in West Somerset; the closest mainline station is Taunton.  A heritage steam railway operates a tourist service along a 20 mile track between Minehead and Bishop Lydeard.  The track is connected to the mainline at Taunton but is used very infrequently for tourist services.  There would be potential to bring a commuter rail service into West Somerset with sufficient finances – reducing the traffic and CO2 emissions on the busy A358.&#xa0;There is one viable bus service which runs between Minehead and Taunton.  All other public transport services in West Somerset are subsidised.  SCC is considering axing many of these services in the future to reduce their costs.contd...To our knowledge no mapping of the present service provision has taken place in the district, so it is not possible to confidently identify where the gaps in provision are.&#xa0;Transport provision is a huge issue in the district and Clinical Commissioning, Public Health, MIND, Somerset Sight and the Alzheimer's Society all share our concerns about the poor public transport service which is available across a large area of our district.&#xa0;4              How effectively do Community Transport services address the needs of passengers in isolated communities?  How could Community Transport be improved?              &#xa0;West Somerset is fortunate to have nine community car schemes operating in the district, run by volunteers, where there is little or no public transport, with the aim of reducing individual isolation and providing access to healthcare and ensuring local families’ health needs are met, where possible.  Accessible Transport West (ATWest - http://www.atwest.org.uk/) is a community transport service offering wheelchair and accessible transport to residents of West Somerset.  They provide for those who do not have their own transport or cannot access public transport or car schemes due to lack to availability, sickness, age or disability.  The services include a SLINKY ‘dial a ride’ door to door service, a car scheme using volunteers own vehicles, Moor Rover (taking local people and tourists with their dogs/bikes to the moor to access linear/circular rights of way) (self-financing), six shopping buses to Minehead and one to Williton (full to capacity – no vacancies at present) and travel club.  All users of ATWest services register free of charge and can then access all their services.&#xa0;Due to the increase in retirement age and the need for people to continue to work, our community transport schemes are finding it much harder to recruit volunteer drivers; these services may need additional funding in the future to encourage more drivers.&#xa0;5              To what extent should passengers in isolated communities be expected to rely on taxis and other demand-responsive transport service?&#xa0;Only those residents who can afford to pay for taxi services should be expected to rely on this provision, particularly taking into consideration the large distances people have to travel to reach our main service areas.  Many of our isolated residents are unable to afford the luxury of a taxi service with the added challenge of having an unknown driver.  For some this can be addressed by using community car scheme service (when available) as the driver is usually a local person, who is already known to them, thereby reducing their perceived vulnerability.&#xa0;6              What are the main challenges associated with funding transport services in isolated communities?  How can these services be made more affordable?&#xa0;Costs for providing the service will only increase.  Funding should be based on need and allocated to those who do not have sufficient funds to pay for taxi services.    Explore new ways to enable people to get from home to their required destination.  Consider bringing more services to residents rather than them having to travel.&#xa0;We would be grateful if the above evidence can be taken into consideration by the Transport Committee.&#xa0;August 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;