&#xa0;Supplementary written evidence from East Riding of Yorkshire Council (TIC 058A)In response to the issues facing the rural population accessing key public services, the East Riding has carried out a piece of research which we feel links directly with the new inquiry the Committee has launched. This research, titled: 'Rural Public Transport Network Design', investigated whether public transport networks (mainly bus transport) in rural areas can be designed in response to the accessibility and social needs of a population. The aim was to have a piece of academic research that could be used alongside actual passenger data when analysing and reviewing subsidised bus services.It also compared the differences between a rural transport network that has developed over time and is based on passenger data against a theoretical transport network that has routes based on research and academic literature.The methodology used identifies the demand for public transport by residents (Origins) for accessing key services (Destinations). Once this is established, two different methods (Scenario 1 and 2) are used to connect people to places. In Scenario 1, GIS Mapping software is used to create a rural public transport network which can be compared to the existing transport network and analysis made. Scenario 2 seeks to highlight key connections and interchanges across the East Riding network as opposed to specific routes. I think the work is particularly relevant to the first 3 questions that the Committee is seeking information on: identify demand for passenger transport in isolated communities, how the different needs of different passengers are taken into account in determining public transport, and what are the main challenges facing rural passengers. The research is yet to be published, but will be submitted as a &#xa0;Dissertation for a MSc in Transport Planning at the Institute of Transport Studies (University of Leeds). The entire paper is approximately 20,000 words with a variety of maps and tables that are used to underline the rural issues facing public transport users, and indeed to emphasise those people who are living in isolated communities. I understand you require succinct submissions, and so I decided to submit the Abstract, Introduction, and the chapter which details the methodology used in the research. September 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;