&#xa0;Written evidence from the Torbay Rail Users Group (TIC 100)&#xa0;&#xa0;The Torbay Line Rail Users Group is a cross-party group who have been working for more than ten years to improve rail services to and from Torbay for long distance, regional and local travel.  Torbay is a unitary authority of three towns, Torquay, Paignton and Brixham.  It is the second largest conurbation west of Bristol, with a resident and increasing  population of 135,000,  second only to Plymouth and larger than Exeter.  It is one of the most important tourist resorts in Britain with outstanding cultural resources.  It has well over one million staying visitors and three million day visitors each year.    The most important industry is tourism.  For a conurbation of  this size, the inadequacy of its rail services make it an isolated community, isolated from neighbouring towns and areas;  the lack of  many evening and Sunday bus services make most areas of the conurbation isolated.&#xa0;improve access to White Rock/Long Park area where residential and business accommodation is being developed and  the South Devon College and its pioneering Energy Centre are located.&#xa0;&#xa0;Torbay’s Industries, Businesses and Services               1. Tourism is Torbay’s biggest industry contributing roughly one third of the income and one third of the employment in the area.  This industry depends on good rail services.   Existing services are not adequate for the number of passengers and there are not enough direct trains.  Passengers do not like changing trains as the results of surveys both by Passenger Focus and by the Torbay Line Rail Users Group (TLRUG) have shown.     Services should run daily, Mondays to Sundays, throughout the year.  Short breaks whether mid-week or at weekends are increasing and services need to meet this development.2.  Torbay Council is developing  further  its marine attractions and is establishing a velodrome to provide year-round facilities.  A group is working on developing package holidays (rail, hotel and guided  tours) to exploit Torbay’s geological, archaeological, historical, literary and cultural  heritage:  urban Geopark recognised by UNESCO, Grade 1 listed building of national importance, rare wildlife, archaeological sites, association with many historical and literary events and personalities, particular architecture,  good museums and art gallery.3.   Some 13% of employment in Torbay is based on banking, finance and  insurance. AstraZeneca’s Brixham Environmental Laboratory has an international reputation for the excellence of its work;  it generates some 1,500 journeys annually.  It also runs visits for members of the public.4.  Public services, education and health services take up nearly half  the employment.  The grammar schools regularly figure in lists of excellent schools.  South Devon College, recognised as outstanding by OFSTED, on the west side of Paignton has some 17,000 students including  500 working for degrees. Torbay Hospital serves a resident population of some 300,000,  specialises in treating strokes and ranks well in the Dr Foster reports.    5.   The College  has won grants of £2.4million from national and EU funds for developing further  work at its Energy Centre on conservation of energy and green technology . This will involve co-operation with international companies throughout Britain and will be a base for educating and training those working on green energy throughout the South West. 6.  Housing developments at White Rock, Great Parks , Yalberton and Sharpham  are in progress or approved on the west side of  Paignton, involving some 400 or more houses annually for 20 years for some16,000 -20,000 people.   There is no rail connection for these activities or these people – a serious lack.7.  Torbay is a large urban area where there is much activity and much more planned, some of which is already partially implemented.   The urban area is however effectively isolated by the inadequacy the existing public transport on which visitors as well as residents depend.&#xa0;Rail Services               8.  Train timetables for services between Torbay and Newton Abbot, Plymouth, Gunnislake, Exeter St Davids, Exeter Central, Exmouth, Crediton, Barnstaple and Tiverton  have been examined.  All these places, except Barnstaple, are within a 30-mile radius of Torbay and therefore within commuting distance  or  practicable for day or evening visits – in short for education, employment, business, leisure and a wide range of cultural and other activities.  In practice, only visits to Newton Abbot and to some extent Exeter fall within this category.  9.  This is not the result of a shortage of trains, but of their timing, the lack of direct trains, good connections and of frequent trains in the evenings, although there are often more trains on summer Saturdays.    Torbay is isolated from other areas and they are isolated from Torbay, a serious disadvantage for Torbay’s tourist trade.10.  All trains from Paignton, the end of the line in Torbay, must pass through Newton Abbot, whatever their further destination.  Of the 30 trains that depart from Paignton on Mondays to Fridays, two leave at 15 minutes past the hour, eight leave at 15 minutes past plus or minus five minutes; another four leave plus or minus ten minutes – which could involve a wait of 20 minutes.  The gaps between trains are very erratic: eight are of 50 to 59 minutes, and another six of 40 to 49 minutes.  These big gaps are unpredictable.  The timetable is so erratic that would-be passengers are effectively discouraged from using the trains.              11.  Long distance trains to London Paddington and to Manchester, the Midlands and North of England are slotted erratically in between the erratic local trains.  Passengers to or from such destinations are likely to check train times in advance.12.  Trains between Torbay and Plymouth are wanted and needed.  Sixty four per cent of respondents to a small survey or poll run by TLRUG gave this as their most desired improvement.  There are no direct trains between Torbay and Plymouth and connections are few.  Any journey between Torbay and Plymouth takes 15 minutes between Paignton and  Newton Abbot and 40 minutes between  Newton Abbot and Plymouth.  The timetables for Mondays to Fridays show that ‘connections’  between -3 or -1 minute (the onward train departs 3 minutes or one minute before the train from Torbay arrives)  or one minute (catch-it-if-you-run-fast)  and a wait of up to 44 minutes.  Nine connections involve waits of 10 minutes or less and eight waits of 11 - 20 minutes;  waits of 20 minutes can add 40 minutes to a return journey, a considerable addition to a daily commute.  All the rest are longer.   Woe betide  the commuter who takes the 8.23 from Paignton arriving at Newton Abbot at 8.39; the next train to Plymouth arrives at 9.57, a wait of  1 hour and 18 minutes, the more galling because the previous train leaves Newton Abbot at 8.35, four minutes earlier.   There are other gaps in the timetable when there are no sensible connections.  Connections between Plymouth and Torbay and on Saturdays and Sundays show similar patterns and are of  very limited value to those making either regular or occasional journeys.13.  There are 30 trains between  Torbay/Paignton and  Newton Abbot, and 42 between Newton Abbot and  Plymouth on Mondays to Fridays.  Similar difficulties exist on Saturdays and Sundays.  Surely something better can be arranged.  This capricious timetable drives would-be passengers off  the trains.    A first step could be to issue a pocket  timetable showing what reasonable connections were available.  This would show up the gaps and  assist the development of a regular half-hourly service throughout the day in  each direction.14.  In  view of these difficulties, it is hardly surprising that of the 658 Torbay residents who commute to Plymouth for their work, only 23 do so by train;  518 travel by car, 27 as passengers in a car and 26 by bus; the bus takes two hours, as against a possible 55 minutes by train if only there were a direct train.  Of the 487 who commute from Plymouth to Torbay, only three do so by train;  376 commute by car, 23 as passengers,  six by bus and eight by motorcycle.15.  Trains to Gunnislake (the Tamar Valley line) depart from Plymouth every two hours usually at 54 minutes past the hour.  In view of the increase of 45%  in the number of passengers since 2006,  a more frequent service should be considered.     16.  Of the 30 trains from Paignton, 29 go to Newton Abbot, then Exeter St Davids, the  station for changing for other destinations  and   for the University.  The 16  local trains stop at every station between Paignton and Exmouth and take about one hour to go from Paignton to Exeter St Davids.  Eight long distance trains go from Paignton to Exeter St Davids and then to London or Manchester, the Midlands or the North.  Only the local trains go to Exeter Central,  the nearest for offices,  shopping and the many cultural resources of the city.              17.  Exmouth enjoys a half-hourly service to Exeter Central and Exeter St Davids.  This is made up of the roughly hourly service from Paignton  to Exmouth and the hourly direct service from Barnstaple (the Tarka line) to  Exmouth.  Torbay has twice the population of Exmouth and Barnstaple put together.  Surely Paignton should have at least a half-hourly local service to the centre of Exeter.  Both the Exmouth and the Barnstaple lines are very successful and extremely well used.  Figures given by First Great Western showed that journeys on the Exmouth (Avocet) line numbered 1.4million in 2012 and had increased by 10% and on the Barnstaple line by 78% since 2006.  A more frequent service from Barnstaple could help fill the gaps in the timetable between Paignton  and Exeter St Davids and between Torbay and Plymouth.18.   If additional trains from Barnstaple ran to Paignton, they could give a half-hourly service between Paignton and  Exeter St Davids, filling gaps in the timetable,  give connectivity and direct services between Torbay and Crediton and the other stations on the Barnstaple line.  19.  Passengers  to Honiton and  the  stations on the way – Exeter Central, Pinhoe, Whimple, Feniton - from Exeter St Davids  must change  platforms for the hourly service, alternately fast trains, journey time  24 minutes, or slow train, 31 minutes stopping at every station.  This is part of the line to London Waterloo and needs doubling  throughout its length.  This service used to run to Paignton, but was stopped at Exeter St Davids in December 2009.    It should be re-instated to Paignton.  If it were, more gaps in the services to Torbay would be filled.20.  There are three direct trains from London Paddington.  The DfT helpfully suggested at one stage in the preparation for the cancelled bid for the Great Western franchise that a lunch-time IEP should be extended to Paignton.  This should certainly be implemented and would provide four trains conveniently spaced through the day.21.  The only direct train from the north of England to Paignton runs on Saturdays .  This is a serious disadvantage for business travellers and tourists.  We wish to suggest that on Mondays to Fridays and Sundays, the 06.06 from Edinburgh should be diverted from Plymouth to Paignton.  The 06.06. makes several calls before arriving at Exeter at 13.44, Newton Abbot at 14.04, Totnes at 14.14 and Plymouth at 14.46 .  Passengers for Torbay change at Newton Abbot and arrive in Paignton at 15.00.  If this train were diverted to Paignton passengers would arrive Paignton at about 14.24,  35 minutes earlier.  Passengers for Plymouth could change at Exeter on Newton Abbot for a First Great Western service arriving at Plymouth at 15.00, 14 minutes later than they otherwise would have done.  On the return , the train departs from  Plymouth at 15.24, calling at Newton Abbot at 16.01,  A local service leaves  Plymouth at 15.08 arriving at Newton Abbot at 15.52.   If the Crosscountry train were diverted to Paignton it could leave Paignton about 15.40/15.45  arriving at Newton Abbot at 16.01. and continuing  as currently scheduled to Leeds.  Diverting this train would provide a conveniently timed train providing direct service between the North East, Yorkshire and Torbay.   This change would provide a service comparable to that on Saturdays.22.  Coaches between Torbay and London run daily but take six hours, nearly twice the time taken by the train.  There is also one coach daily between Paignton and Newcastle, Bradford/Leeds and Rugby respectively.23.  If the line were extended from Paignton to Goodrington it would serve developments at Long Park/White Rock on the western side of Paignton.  These include housing  (16,000-20,000 people), the development and work of the South Devon College and its Energy Centre, business developments and also better connectivity with Brixham.  Access to this side of Paignton is difficult along congested roads with heavy traffic and many pedestrians.24.  The Heritage line runs from Paignton to Kingswear and the ferry to Dartmouth, another outstanding  town attracting  many visitors, with stations serving residential areas along its line.  The company runs excellent heritage trips for leisure visitors chiefly in the spring, summer and early autumn months and a few at bank holidays.               25.  We believe that  if commuter trains could run on their tracks,  students would be able to reach the South Devon College easily and commuters get to their jobs.  Commuting journeys outside the times used by the Heritage railway would not interfere with the latter’s use of the tracks, but would provide a very valuable service to many people.  Such a development could provide better connectivity to Kingsbridge, Salcombe and the South Hams, which are without stations and tracks.&#xa0;                                                                                                                                            ……/&#xa0;&#xa0;Bus Services26 .    One good bus service runs  between Newton Abbot and Brixham with a ten-minute frequency from 7.20 to 18.37, then every 20 minutes until 23.37.    Between Newton Abbot and Paignton, the train takes 15 minutes, the bus 40 to 50 minutes.   Four services  run every 15  or 20 minutes during the day Mondays to Saturdays and half-hourly in the evenings and on Sundays. 27.  Other services run less frequently and rarely or  not at all in the evenings or on Sundays.  This means that for those living in most of Torbay,  no public transport is available for evening or Sunday activities;  these residents and visitors are isolated and dependent on paying for taxis or cadging lifts -  which can be embarrassing for both parties.28.  Access to and from other parts of the county are difficult and normally depend on making connections at Exeter, Plymouth, or another town.    Some services do not run every day, for example from a village to a town for a shopping expedition, so of no use to someone wishing to visit a village or a friend or relative there.  Some services run only one to four trips daily, excluding evenings and Sundays, so making possible difficulties in making return trips for whatever purpose, whether work, education, for hospital visits or similar reasons or  visits to friends or relatives.  These difficulties arise both for those coming to Torbay and for those going from Torbay.  It can be impossible to make a daytime return visit, still more to make an evening visit. &#xa0;Resilience              29.  For resilience, not only is the Teign Valley line or an equivalent required, but also the re-establishment of the former route via Okehampton – Tavistock – Plymouth.  A first stage would be the re-establishment of a regular daily service between Exeter and Okehampton, particularly useful as a result of the recent closure of  several businesses and consequent increase in unemployment in Okehampton.  The line from Tavistock to Bere Alston and Plymouth is already well advanced.  This leaves only the gap between Okehampton and Tavistock to be re-established.                30.  In view of the increasing number of rail passengers and of older people who are less likely to drive, and of the need to reduce emissions from vehicles to meet the Government’s targets for climate change,  provision should be made by regulation, or if necessary by legislation, to safeguard the track of former rail lines, so that they remain available to be brought back into use.&#xa0;August 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;   No.31, 18 May - 8 September  2013   ONS, UK travel flows, journey to work by mode of travel    At the meeting of Travelwatch  Southwest on 2 March 2013