&#xa0;

[[[Written submission from Halton Borough Council (LPG 26)]]]&#xa0;Purpose of the Report:Halton Borough Council wishes to submit evidence to the Select Committee in relation to the inquiry into Local Government Procurement. This evidence outlines our procurement journey, demonstrates our best practice and how we have secured value for money through our commercial procurement concept. We have developed this in-house and are now working with a number of public sector partners to align their processes, practices and rules to ours in order to share our concept and replicate our success delivering further efficiencies and savings in other organisations.Executive Summary:Opportunities for Consideration:Overview of Halton’s Commercial Procurement Concept:Halton Borough Council has placed Commercial Procurement at the heart of its business since April 2010. It continues to be one of the Council’s key solutions to avoid reductions to frontline services and protecting the vulnerable. It will remain to be at the centre of our organisation as we look to balance budgets year on year.Halton benefits from strong leadership and a clear direction of support from Executive Board and Chief Officers as well as a dynamic vision from their Head of Procurement who has orchestrated her ideas into reality leading whole organisational change through improved strategic procurement. This has delivered significant cashable and non-cashable savings leading to improved service excellence.   From April 2010 a commercial approach to procurement was diagnosed, designed and then implemented across the whole organisation. This commenced with a review of spend, structures, processes and resources as a ‘health check’ guiding us on ‘quick wins’ but leading to a whole organisational change management programme, from education, communication &amp; training, ‘rules’ review and challenge in order to deliver significant outcomes. The application of commercial procurement has allowed us to take a stepped approach to change and has delivered a best practice concept that could be modelled into any organisation. This concept has been underpinned 

[[[by Six Key Building Blocks: ]]]Halton recognised that procurement is a strategic function and is committed to placing it at the centre of its activities. This work stream was successful from:&#xa0;Halton has embraced the importance of robust governance and work practices to support a commercial approach to procurement making this a key strategic function. Procurement Standing Orders review was paramount to our success as this set down new work parameters in order to secure better ‘gate-keeping’ which include:&#xa0;Having full visibility of spend has influenced our approach to procurement leading to the delivery of savings and achieving cost avoidance.

[[[ ]]]We have converted thinking from ‘what we want’ to ‘what we actually need’; which directly influences demand and consumption to reduce costs significantly. &#xa0;This is a proven way of working with key suppliers and is used in other public sector organisations to review overall business relationships, contractual arrangements, specifications, rates and expected outputs in order to mutually agree benefits which will result in savings for the Council as the customer. It will deliver greater value, meet strategic objectives and add social value. This will have greater leverage if we work with partners. In support of SRM:&#xa0;Halton has adopted a category management approach to procurement by aligning business requirements across the organisation. By working with wider partners we are starting to gain greater leverage, added value and maximising more savings. As Halton is relatively small in terms of spend and leverage, we can capture all internal aggregation to drive a category approach to procurement but would significantly gain if partners worked in a more aligned way.&#xa0;Halton has developed internal automated process relationships between procurement and accounts payable into a seamless end-to-end process in order to improve efficiencies using e-procurement solutions. This is underpinned by:Response to the specific topics:&#xa0;

[[[1. To what extent is local government procurement organised to deliver value for money and social, economic and environmental objectives, including stimulating the local economy? To what extent are local authorities ]]]

[[[achieving the involvement of local residents in delivering value for money? To what extent are local authorities able to develop long-term relationships with contractors?]]]&#xa0;Firstly, Value for Money is secured from our commercial procurement concept as we aspire to publish all trading opportunities for spend from £1,000 upwards via The Chest in order that our practices are fully transparent. This enables market testing all spending decisions, this practice is designed to be proportionate to both risk and value and it allows opportunity to suppliers to tender or quote which supports the stimulation and growth of the local and SME economy. Our spend in 2012/13 demonstrated that 89% was with SMEs. &#xa0;We are continually improving our approach to social value and not just when considering the evaluation criterion which needs to be bespoke and proportionate but in order that it allows us to measure social value gains as well as seek best value in terms of both quality and price. &#xa0;The social value gain needs to be embedded into the contract through voluntary or mandatory clauses in order to ensure this value is captured contractually and not just rhetoric in the bidder’s submissions. &#xa0;We are developing a social value policy and a set of principles to be embedded into procurement where appropriate to ensure we firstly engage at the pre-procurement stage with potential bidders in order to educate and support as well as allowing bidders to attend and contribute to an open forum to help us design service delivery to best deliver the outcomes required. We have strengthened the contract management function to ensure it is more commercial in terms of ensuring that performance indicators are measured and challenged when not being achieved. &#xa0;Halton is one of the four localities in England to take part in the Delivering Social Value in Health Programme. The programme aims to support the implementation of the Public Services (Social Value) Act 2012 locally. Halton will develop best practice of how social value can be gained particularly through health and wellbeing through procurement. &#xa0;We commenced a campaign during 2010 for businesses which has continued to date in terms of promoting our ‘New Ways of Trading’. This was underpinned by a series of business workshops which educated and supported the business community in local government procurement; registering and using The Chest; as well as demonstrating our commitment in Halton to ensure transparency of opportunity and to make the process simple and clear. &#xa0;Our process is risk based rather than value unlike the EU financial thresholds. This has enabled us to challenge and review our processes and practices and to address what was termed as a bureaucratic and onerous historically in Halton by our business community.&#xa0;We have clear performance indicators which are being embedded into our larger contracts which take account of the how the main contractor can contribute to Employment, Learning and Skills growth in Halton. We also measure this through the transparency of opportunity for smaller contractors as part of their supply chain. This was applied and tested in contracts such as Building Schools for the Future (£60M) and Highways joint contract across Halton and Warrington Councils (£70-100M over 10 years). This contractor has also relocated into the Borough.  Similar KPIs are being developed at present into Mersey Gateway Bridge contract (£600M). &#xa0;

[[[2. Do authorities take sufficient advantage of collaborative and joint procurement opportunities, including those available from central government? In addition, the Committee would welcome information on PFI contracts and their operation with local government.]]]&#xa0;Local Government does not take advantage enough of collaborative and joint procurement opportunities. Our perception of the barriers to this are; different rules in each organisation; the timings of contract end dates and the lack of motivation for one or more partner to extend their contract in order to align timings; lack of regional leadership and coordination; no mandate to drive collaboration just enthusiasm of the willing few; and the perceived threat of a ‘shared service’ if we procure together.&#xa0;The solution could be; aligning rules and processes; developing a partnership approach to contract management i.e. one contract register which could be facilitated through an e-solution and sharing spend data in order that we have joint planning and identify aggregate opportunities. All of this requires strong commitment and clear cross-partner leadership to allow all of these opportunities to be explored and then implemented. We should approach procurement as ‘one buyer’. This doesn’t have to be a regional approach just a collaborative approach where more than one public sector partner works together.&#xa0;Central government opportunities as well as other central purchasing bodies are mostly explored as part of our pre-procurement activity in Halton to ensure we benchmark in order to seek the best route to market.In Halton we do have a PFI contract as part of BSF. We have an established LEP which is considered as part of the pre procurement process for construction spend and is benchmarked accordingly as this is a pre-procured route so can offer some value for money. This is a Joint Venture Company where Halton BC is a 10% shareholder.&#xa0;

[[[3. How can local authorities access the skills, expertise and capabilities to implement effective procurement strategies, including value for money and social and economic objectives? More specifically, does local government have sufficient understanding of its procurement expenditure and the markets for goods and services to deliver quality procurement strategies—locally and regionally. If not, how can deficiencies be addressed?]]]&#xa0;Local authorities need to utilise Halton’s Commercial Procurement concept, which is designed, tested and implemented and is now being embraced by a few public sector partners. Halton has invested in the procurement to grow the skills and capabilities which has been underpinned by a clear strategy and strong leadership and expertise.&#xa0;Other Local Authorities could consider sharing leadership in order to drive organisational change through procurement. This concept is currently being tested by Sefton MBC who have signed up to aligning their procurement rules, processes and practices to Halton’s and Halton is providing direct leadership, training and support. Halton are also delivering a pilot to Halton Clinical Commissioning Group with the intention of securing a contract from 2014 to deliver a procurement service. This is the start of driving wider partner integration through procurement. Halton aspires to develop such relationships with other public sector partners as the demand is rapidly growing.&#xa0;There is a distinct lack of robust strategic procurement leadership within the public sector which may be as a result of not recruiting the right skill base or not valuing the skill that the right person will bring to lead whole organisational change? Funding pressures may be a barrier particularly in the public sector not recognising the opportunity of transforming services through procurement therefore not investing in this work stream and resourcing this concept.&#xa0;If we were to look overseas for example; New Zealand, there is a coordinated approach ‘Government Procurement Reform) led from central government to support local government and schools in procurement improvement. We need to establish a national approach, developing more formal cross partner support to challenge local government procurement and offer support, direction and solutions to be tailored at a local level.&#xa0;Procurement sits in every organisation as we all buy, therefore standardised rules, processes, and procedures, should be encouraged as part of a national campaign. Our work reaches across public health and clinical commissioning groups as well as wider public sector partners. &#xa0;Our commercial procurement concept focusses on Demand Management and Supplier Relationship Management which underpin how we approach our strategy to procurement as Halton BC knows its procurement expenditure and its markets and uses this to drive procurement priorities and opportunities. &#xa0;

[[[4. To what extent is risk in local government procurement and contracting understood and managed and contracting strategies adopted, which are tailored to product and supplier market places? More specifically, do local authorities maintain and operate effective client management functions and have they entered contractual arrangements which allow the flexibility to meet changing circumstances such as budget reductions or changes in the way a service has to be delivered?]]]&#xa0;Halton underpins all procurement activity with a risk assessment process (Risk Based Sourcing - RBS) for all spend below EU financial thresholds and this replaces the PQQ. Understanding of risk is paramount and this sits at the start of the pre-procurement process as we focus on risk not value below EU.&#xa0;As part of this pre-procurement risk assessment process officers explore risk in every respect in order that risks are identified and then removed, reduced or managed throughout the procurement process and the life of the contract.&#xa0;We do operate an effective client management function as we manage our procurement on a category basis and this links to contract management which sits with the client department but we maintain a commercial contract management function centrally and contract register.&#xa0;We do build in at the pre-procurement stage as part of the risk assessment process a step to secure funding availability and approval in order to identify any risk; we work closely with our finance department. This allows us to build in to both the procurement process and contract management process lean procurement principles in order to respond to change.&#xa0;Contract management needs to be more focussed on commercial challenge. We are developing a strategic approach to this by undertaking a ‘root and branch’ approach to reviewing contracts; this is one of our six building blocks – Supplier Relationship Management. This process will be seen as an audit of each contract and its commercial outputs, ensures compliance and will allow the chance to challenge non-compliance and to understand how the contract can be used flexibly to adapt to changing requirements. The learning from this will allow us to greatly develop ever more flexible clauses so we can respond to pressures and external influences as they arise in a changing public sector canvass. This contract review will also highlight financial efficiencies and improvements that can be sought from this review and challenge process.&#xa0;There are other ‘vehicles’ which allow a more flexible approach to procurement such as Dynamic Purchasing Systems (DPS) which allow a procurement process to remain ‘open’ in order to encourage the ‘best of breed’ into the supplier market at any stage and allows flexibility as to how we select these pre-procured providers to deliver services. We are exploring such options.&#xa0;

[[[5. How is regularity and propriety of procurement secured and are the arrangements for detecting and addressing impropriety and fraud effective?]]]&#xa0;Regularity and propriety of procurement is secured in Halton as we utilise an e-tendering portal called The Chest which maintains a full audit trail of procurement activity. We have robust procurement rules and control procurement centrally to drive compliance. &#xa0;Our Executive Board play a full part in procurement in terms of our rules requiring decisions to be made at Board level such as spend approval over £1M before commencement of procurement and waiver requests where our rules cannot be followed.&#xa0;Our Business Efficiency Board undertake a scrutiny role, they select a number of procurement exercises to ‘test’ annually in order to evaluate the end to end process and to make recommendations to Executive Board in terms of the rules. &#xa0;Our internal audit team have scrutinised The Chest system and processes as well as select annually a number of procurement exercises to audit, more so, those of material value. The Audit Commission also reviewed our new ways of working and the use of The Chest and commended this as “Much strengthened procurement and significantly improved procurement arrangements as a key mechanism for delivering the efficiency programme across the Council” (Annual governance report 2010/11). &#xa0;Our central role is guidance, support and advice as well as challenge and moderation. In Halton we do adopt a ‘team around the table’ approach in order to bring the service specialists together with the procurement specialists. All of our processes are standardised and we have fully implemented our risk based approach, standard documentation and a web based process which are used before we use The Chest to facilitate the actual procurement exercise.&#xa0;

[[[6. Is local authority procurement fully transparent, audited effectively and does it provide appropriate mechanisms for redress? Specifically, are the arrangements for securing the accountability of procured services and goods to local authorities and local residents adequate and effective? More specifically, to what extent are local authorities able to provide assurance to central government that value for money (in the broadest sense of the term) is delivered?]]]&#xa0;Our local authority procurement is fully transparent but this isn’t the case in many public sector organisations. This is demonstrated as all procurement above £1,000 is processed via The Chest.&#xa0;Mechanisms for redress: The Remedies Directive is there for EU value procurement. For spend below EU we take complaints and challenges very seriously. We have a complaints procedure but we do adopt the principles of transparency in terms of feedback by providing a rank position for all bidders for procurement activity below EU. If additional feedback is requested we will respond. EU principles are adopted for all procurement activity.&#xa0;The whole concept we have designed, tested and embedded demonstrates how we can assure central government that we deliver value for money. This is underpinned by a clear and measurable strategy and our simple Procurement Standing Orders.&#xa0;Conclusion:&#xa0;We recognise in Halton that we have made significant progress in securing a commercial procurement concept which is fully embedded into the organisation. We commend this concept and approach to all public sector organisations as it clearly demonstrates value for money, reduces risk significantly, removes bureaucracy and benefits the supply market as well as the public sector. We recognise that public sector organisations have different priorities and demands and there are significant variations in performance which means there is greater scope for improvement. Some procurement practices are too ‘traditional’, under resourced and lack procurement vision and leadership. But we all face the same pressures economically, socially and environmentally and we all spend public money therefore, we all must be accountable and we all must secure value for money which is clearly demonstrable from the success in Halton. &#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;