&#xa0;

[[[Written s]]]

[[[ubmission ]]]

[[[from Abby Semple LL.B (LPG 41)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]Abby Semple, LL.B. Public Procurement Analysis&#xa0;The purpose of this submission is to highlight the role of the EU procurement directives – and in particular the changes being proposed in the new directives – in local authority procurement. The directives form part of the EU’s single market policy and aim to ensure non-discrimination and transparency in the award of public contracts. Through successive generations of directives and case law of the European Court of Justice, the scope of the EU procurement rules has expanded to cover many different forms of contract undertaken by the broader public sector, including concession arrangements and public-private partnerships. Although there is a cost associated with compliance with the directives, there are also clear benefits in terms of increased competition and professionalisation of procurement. The new generation of directives seeks to facilitate the strategic use of procurement, notably to achieve environmental and social objectives. The success of these measures will depend upon the approach taken by governments at all levels to implement them in practice. Value for moneyMost public and private sector procurement identifies value for money (VfM) as a core objective. Procurement decisions based on VfM may be distinguished from those based on the lowest price, quality alone or decisions made on some other basis such as relationships with suppliers, political or administrative expediency. Under the EU rules, contracts can be awarded on the basis of ‘lowest price only’ or ‘most economically advantageous tender’ (MEAT) – which implies that both cost and qualitative aspects are taken into account when bids are evaluated. Research by the Commission in 2011 indicated that lowest price was being used in approximately one-third of procedures advertised in the Official Journal, whereas MEAT was used in the remaining two-thirds. Under the 2013 directives ‘lowest cost only’ will likely replace ‘lowest price only’ – meaning that there is scope to account for operating costs as well as up-front purchase price.Assessing value for money in a procurement process is intended to deliver a better allocation of scarce resources amongst competing ends. It achieves this by weighing the cost and qualitative aspects of different options and choosing the optimal solution based on the needs of the contracting authority. VfM may be assessed both internally within a tender - i.e. by comparing the relative scores achieved by competing bids, and externally, by comparing the outcome of the competition with other options such as in-house provision, availing of a shared service or alternative expenditure. There is no universal formula for assessing VfM in procurement; it depends on the contract in question and upon the options which are available to the contracting authority. The way in which both costs and quality are measured, and how these are then compared to each other, varies widely between organisations and individual tenders. Increasingly public procurers are asked to balance a number of competing objectives: short and long-term value, up-front purchase costs, innovation, social and environmental goals - and to do all this in a manner which complies with the procurement rules and attracts competition. &#xa0;In this environment, it may be difficult to ‘act quickly and get the best deal’ – a criticism often made when comparing public to private sector procurement. However the assumption that private sector procurement is more driven by commercial considerations, and thus obtains better value for money, deserves some scrutiny. A 2011 study which analysed both public and private sector tender procedures found that despite the perception that private sector procurement is more efficient, competition and price pressure may actually be weaker. In terms of transaction costs, public tender procedures did on average require more person-days - in part a reflection of the larger number of firms participating. This indicates that there may be a positive correlation between transaction costs and levels of competition or price pressure, although further research is needed to establish the overall effect which this has on value for money. &#xa0;A focus on short-term prices frequently obscures the actual cost of procurement decisions, even where those costs will be borne by the contracting authority itself. There are a number of approaches to broadening VfM assessment, including the rules on life-cycle costing (LCC) set out in the draft 2013 directives and the use of a public sector comparator (PSC)  to assess the relative value of carrying out certain functions in-house. These techniques have significant potential to improve decisions both at the planning and procurement stages if they are properly understood and applied. They are not however a substitute for intelligent budgeting and commercial acumen. The exercise of these last two functions falls outside of the EU procurement regime. Efficiency, or allocation of scarce resources in a optimal way amongst competing ends, is an on-going preoccupation of budgetary regimes – but there is no agreement across time, political wind changes and financial systems as to how efficiency in public spending should be measured. Changes in budgeting affect procurement decisions, for example a move from input-based to output or performance-based budgeting will affect how contracts are designed, awarded and monitored.&#xa0;Skills for procurement While there has been an overall trend towards greater professionalisation and skill in local authority procurement, frequent changes in policy and law make it difficult to keep up. This makes it all the more essential that any recommendations for change are grounded in strong data and take account of the experience of frontline procurers across the public sector. The new EU directives provide a number of opportunities to develop procurement strategy in a way which better meets the needs of individual organisations and society as a whole, for example by promoting environmental and social objectives, innovation and the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises. UK policy, including the implementing measures for the new directives, should  take advantage of these opportunities and provide support for their effective use. Local authorities and devolved agencies throughout the UK have been leaders in making their procurement more sustainable, so there is ample room to build upon existing successes.  &#xa0;Sustainability in procurement&#xa0;Examples of sustainable procurement measures widely adopted by local authorities include the promotion of equality in the labour force and fair working conditions, reduction of energy consumption and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, proper management of natural resources and waste, and the development of renewable energy sources. By taking these or other considerations into account in procurement, authorities seek to reduce the negative externalities of their contracts and leverage government spending power to promote socially and environmentally responsible practices. In the context of the EU internal market and WTO Government Procurement Agreement, social and environmental objectives must be reconciled with the principles of open competition, transparency and equal treatment. These various objectives are not mutually exclusive – open and transparent cross-border competition for public contracts has the potential to contribute to environmental and social goals while delivering value-for-money. This may occur by stimulating firms to innovate and ultimately reducing the costs associated with delivery of environmentally and socially responsible goods, works and services.The Commission's proposal for a new Public Sector Directive (COM 896 (2011)) contained the following provisions intended to facilitate sustainable procurement:It remains to be seen which of these proposals will be adopted, and in what form, by the Council and Parliament this autumn. &#xa0;&#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;Subject to the current compromise draft being adopted by the Parliament and Council. If lowest cost is used, some qualitative assessment of bids will still take place to determine whether they meet the specification. However this is done on a pass/fail basis, rather than by assigning a score. European Commission (2011) Evaluation Report: Impact and Effectiveness of EU Public Procurement Legislation SEC (2011) 853 final at page 146. Lowest price only was used mainly for lower-value contracts.  Currently this is only possible when MEAT was used as the award basis. Strand, I. Ramada, P. and Canton, E. (2011) Public procurement in Europe: Cost and effectiveness PwC, London Economics and Ecorys at pages 121-123. The study analyses some 540,000 procurements advertised in the Official Journal over five years (2006-2010) from 30 countries. This data was supplemented by a survey of 7,300 authorities and firms and 150 in-depth interviews regarding different aspects of procurement procedures. Interviews were carried out with 20 large private sector construction and services firms regarding their own procurement, supplementing the survey responses from 1882 firms.  For a comprehensive discussion of these approaches see McCrudden, C. (2007) Buying Social Justice: Equality, government procurement and legal change Oxford: Oxford University Press An extensive literature is developing on the use of public procurement to stimulate innovation, and many of the cases cited involve social or eco-innovation. See, inter alia: Wilkinson et al. (2005); Aho et al. (2006); Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (2011). The impact of GPP/SPP on costs has not been systematically studied in the EU, however some evidence does exist to link it to reduced prices for environmentally or socially responsible goods and services. A 2009 report found an average 1% reduction in costs associated with the introduction of GPP criteria across ten product groups in seven Member States. See Pricewater-houseCoopers, Significant and Ecofys, (2009), p. 5-7. &#xa0;