&#xa0;

[[[S]]]

[[[ubmission from the International Association for Contract &amp; Commercial Management]]]

[[[ ]]]This submission is made by the International Association for Contract &amp; Commercial Management (IACCM). IACCM is a worldwide non-profit association dedicated to raising the quality and integrity of trading relationships through improved contracting and commercial practices. It is the premier international body for contracts and commercial practitioners, representing both buyers and sellers. With more than 30,000 members representing over 8,000 organisations and from 150 countries, IACCM delivers extensive research, training and thought-leadership in its field. It works with both public and private sectors, to disseminate best practice and to assist in organisational growth and success.The observations contained in this submission are based upon knowledge and experience with UK Local Government, but also drawing from worldwide insights and research regarding state and local government in other similar countries.

[[[EXECUTIVE SUMMARY]]]

[[[Local Government procurement suffers from an absence of executive leadership and investment. Its current fragmented operations add to a general loss of opportunities to increase the value of its contribution. In general, procurement activities are not supported by the skills, tools or professional confidence required to support acquisition practices in today’s complex business environment. This submission recommends that:]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[1. Delivering value for money, objectives, involvement and relationships]]]1.1 The challenges highlighted by this question are universal to procurement organisations in both public and private sector. Social, economic and technological developments are placing tremendous pressure on the entire discipline of procurement and challenging its role and current skills.1.2 For example, a shift to ‘value for money’ (as opposed to the traditional measurement of theoretical savings) implies a need to be far more engaged in overseeing and monitoring outputs and outcomes, rather the cost of input. This shift is in fact essential as key acquisitions shift from products to services and solutions.1.3 Another example relates to the broader demands created by growing regulation and transparency. The need for procurement decisions to be made within a much wider risk context forces growing consideration of broad stakeholder interests and perspectives, to an extent that is far greater than in the past.1.4 Thirdly, the need to involve the local community and stimulate the local economy demands a far wider commercial understanding and assessment than is typically the case in traditional procurements. It requires different contracting and commercial models, increased creativity and the ability to manage complex supply ecosystems.1.5 On the matter of long-term relationships, many authorities struggle with the balance between maintaining relationships and ensuring competition. In part this is due to a lack of thorough economic assessment; it is also due to outdated selection procedures; and sometimes relationships are undermined by an unnecessary adherence to narrowly interpreted rules and regulations (specifically EU Procurement Regulations).1.6 To be blunt, there is limited evidence that local government procurement is organised or skilled to meet these challenges. Its fragmentation is not conducive to building strong skills or market relationships. Procurement activity – and commercial acumen in general – are not highly rated or visibly encouraged as core competencies.  Therefore success stories appear to be the exception rather than the norm and when success occurs, it is rarely replicated elsewhere.

[[[2. Collaborative and joint procurement opportunities]]]2.1 IACCM does not have in-depth insight to this question, though in general our observation would be that there is extensive additional opportunity in these areas. As with the private sector, unless there is strong leadership, operational resources feel little need or incentive to build collaborative or joint activities. They may lack the necessary connections; they typically lack the necessary authority; and they may consider such initiatives as job-threatening.2.2 With regard to topics such as PFI, such models require a distinct set of skills and knowledge which may often be lacking within any individual authority. Also, the approach may be used so infrequently that it is not practical or affordable to develop and maintain such skills. There are strong arguments for centralised or regionalised skill groups, available to support infrequent or innovative commercial models. PFI is one of these, but others include the wider need for greater skills in areas such as outsourcing, joint ventures, teaming agreements and alliances.

[[[3. Access to skills, expertise and capabilities]]]3.1 The relatively small scale of most local authority budgets and the diverse nature of their spend makes it impractical to build the necessary skills, expertise and capabilities at a local level. While local understanding and empathy is clearly important, it must be balanced against the costs of inefficiency and lack of effectiveness that comes from inadequate resources.3.2 Therefore several initiatives appear essential:1) a re-skilling of existing procurement staff. Within private industry, there is currently a strong drive to reconsider the skills needed by core procurement personnel, but also to raise awareness and understanding more broadly across the organisation. Indeed, a similar initiative is already being undertaken in the Civil Service with a focus on commercial skills and competence at all levels.2) developing in-depth expertise and access. We live in a world of increasing specialism. For example, today we do not simply consult a lawyer; we consult a  lawyer with very specific expertise on a narrow area such as Intellectual Property, Regulation or Data Privacy. Similar pockets of expertise must be developed to support Local Government procurement. This may be through academies; it may be through central or regional support groups; and it should also be through access to ‘on-demand’ resources, both physical and virtual (for example, on-line materials as well as help desks). A focus for the procurement discipline must be its role in expanding and sharing knowledge, not acting as a central group to undertake review and approval.3) Others will doubtless make observations about the need for better segmentation of the acquisition portfolio and the need for increased category management. Some level of central buying and catalogue management would assist. Certainly these disciplines are fundamental to understanding expenditure and leveraging markets. In the first instance, such data can only be gathered and analysed through some centrally organised activity. Again, there is much in this area that can be learnt from the private sector, especially from the experience of multi-national corporations that wrestled with the need to rationalise buying across multiple independent divisions and autonomous country organisations.4) A critical step will be to consider the role of Supplier Relationship Management, a discipline that appears to be largely absent from Local Government procurement. Only by sustained engagement with suppliers can value for money and wider policy objectives be realised. Failure to motivate and manage on-going performance is one of the primary causes of value erosion and missed targets.

[[[4. Risk and contracts]]]4.1 We operate in a world of growing choice and growing complexity. This has resulted in increased risks. The range of risks has also broadened – for example, there are far more regulations; reputational risk is now a field in its own right; global market risk has intruded into local government through the use of foreign suppliers or service providers. 4.2 The challenges faced by local government are not unique, yet (as previously indicated) the mechanisms to grasp their significance often appear lacking. In part this is because of the limited insights and perspectives that are available or encouraged by a locally-focused institution. The framework within which local government operates is not by its nature outward looking. 4.3 This leads to a tendency towards conservatism and risk aversion. In that sense, innovative contracts or terms and conditions are likely to be viewed with suspicion. It also means there is no executive drive to demand more from the procurement teams. 4.4 In general, local government tends to suffer from a common problem; risk aversion is confused with risk management. Yet of course, an aversion to risk often results in negative consequences. For example, today’s risk practices encourage  a strong focus on supply ecosystem management; they push for more joint working and joint problem solving forums;; they encourage open communication and transparent discussion and handling of shared risks. There is little evidence that such techniques are emerging in a majority of local authorities.4.5 The topic of flexibility is key. All businesses are operating in volatile market conditions and the ability to effectively manage change is critical. This demands not only different forms of contract, but also more sophisticated approaches to post-award contract management. In general, local government suffers from no defined contract management process. Contracts, once signed, tend to be given to functional or departmental groups to manage. These people have generally received no training and lack tools. There is rarely any central insight into the actual performance of contracts.

[[[5. Regularity and propriety of procurement]]]We have no specific insights on this question.

[[[6. Transparency, audit, mechanisms for redress]]]6.1 Based upon the responses already provided, the answer to this question is clearly ‘no’. There is no facility today to track or improve upon the value leakage that occurs or to provide true transparency. With regard to the issue of redress, it seems that the fear of challenge is often one of the core factors undermining value and transparency.6.2 Improvement requires a rethink of tools and systems (the technology base for local government to manage its contracts and relationships is inadequate). Without the right systems, there is little meaningful performance analysis and, without this, there is limited opportunity to improve. Many of the problems and issues that arise are repetitive and could be overcome, but they depend upon a readiness to build skills and to ensure appropriate systems support. Central direction, executive support and clear strategic goals are essential in order to develop a confident, competent and commercially-minded procurement service for local government. &#xa0;Tim CumminsChief Executive OfficerIACCM&#xa0;