&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by James Painter (CLC057)]]]1. The Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism (RISJ) is part of the Department of Politics and International Relations at the University of Oxford.  It was established in 2006. The RISJ aims to serve as a leading forum for a productive engagement between scholars from a wide range of disciplines and the practitioners of journalism.  It aims to bring the depth of academic scholarship to major issues of relevance to the practice of the news media. 2. The RISJ regularly publishes reports and books on various issues affecting the media.  On the specific issue of climate change, it has published three recent works:  Summoned by Science: Reporting Climate Change at Copenhagen and Beyond (2010); Poles Apart: the international reporting of climate scepticism (2011); and Climate Change in the Media:&#xa0;reporting&#xa0;risk and uncertainty (forthcoming, September 2013).&#xa0; 3. James Painter is the author of the above three publications.  In an individual capacity, he has also published extensively on the theme of climate change and the media, including a recent academic article on the relative presence of climate scepticism in the UK print media compared to the media in five other countries.  He also teaches the MSc module on the media and the environment at the School of Geography, Oxford University.4. This submission focuses on the role that the UK media play in portraying climate change, the affect that this may have on public understanding, and recommendations that may help journalists, scientists and government bodies improve the communication of climate science.

[[[5. The committee asks: ]]]

[[[Which voices are trusted in public discourse on climate science and polic]]]

[[[y? What role should Government Departments, scientific advisers to Government and publicly funded scientists have in communicating climate science?]]]6.  Even though various surveys show different results about the trends in the absolute level of trust in climate scientists (for example, Poortinga et al., 2011 and Shuckburgh et al., 2012), two recent surveys which focus on comparative levels of trust in different sectors clearly indicate that climate scientists in the UK are significantly more trusted than other sectors such as politicians, environmental groups/charities or the media to talk about climate science (Donald, 2013; Shuckburgh et al., 2012). 7.  In this context, it is worth pointing out that even though they are the most trusted group, scientists are often not the most vocal group to be heard in the media.  A RISJ 2010 study on the media coverage of the Copenhagen summit in December 2009 showed that when the climate science was being reported in newspaper articles, university scientists represented only 12% of those quoted on the science, compared to 11% for representatives of environment or development NGOs (Painter, 2010).  This was despite the fact that around 2,000 members of delegations from 250 universities around the world were present at the summit, including 280 professors.8. Part of the explanation for this is that NGOs and governments had far more communication officers or media relations personnel at Copenhagen than universities. For example, Greenpeace alone had more media people there than all the universities put together (20 compared to 12). The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) had just one paid media officer at the time, although at the time of writing this has since been increased to two.9. There is plenty of scope for climate scientists from government departments, universities and other publicly funded bodies to receive more training in effective public engagement, including how to deal with the different types of media.  There are well-run organisations offering excellent training (such as the Science Media Centre).  But it remains the case that often scientists are not good communicators with a wider audience beyond their peer group and/or are (understandably) reluctant to engage with the media through fear of misrepresentation, or being asked to comment beyond their area of expertise or engage in adversarial debate (amongst other factors).  More institutional recognition needs to be given to those scientists who do engage with the media, as it requires time, experience, commitment and skill.  

[[[10. The committee asks: ]]]

[[[How could public understanding of what is meant by climate change be improved? What are the main barriers to this? ]]]

[[[Do the media]]]

[[[ have a positive role to play?]]]11. To focus on the media coverage of climate change, it is worth stressing that the degree to which media coverage of any particular issue affects or changes individual attitudes, understanding or behaviour change is a disputed area in academic circles. Many scholars argue that the media may only have a minor impact, when compared to other factors such as wider cultural, social or political values and the views of peer groups, family or friends.  However, there is much more agreement that the media have a huge role in setting the agenda for what people talk or think about, even if they have much less of a role in shaping their views.12. In the specific area of science coverage, most people in the UK get their information from the media, so the way the media report and frame climate change is one significant input into public understanding of the topic. 13. It is also important to point to the strong evidence that in their consumption of news, the UK public have markedly different levels of trust in different media organisations and platforms.  In a 2013 report on the digital consumption of news, the RISJ found that despite the advance of new and social media such as blogs, Facebook and Twitter, the web sites of the UK broadcasters were by far the most trusted for news by 79% of those surveyed (Newman and Levy, 2013).  These were followed by UK newspaper sites (60%), news-related blogs (11%), Twitter (10%) and Facebook (8%). 14.  Of the UK broadcasters, the BBC’s coverage of science topics is recognised around the world for its high quality. Part of the reason for this is that the BBC for the most part takes considerable pains to follow its editorial guidelines of aiming for ‘due impartiality’ in reporting climate science, in other words asking its correspondents and reporters to reflect the mainstream consensus on climate science while not ruling out the presence of climate sceptics when their presence is deemed to be appropriate (for example in discussing policy options of how to tackle climate change, rather than the science of climate change).15.  However, there have been recent examples from some BBC output such as the Daily Politics Show where the programme might have been better served by inviting climate scientists, rather than advocates, onto the programme.   In June 2012 for example, Friends of the Earth’s Andrew Pendleton was invited to debate with the well-known sceptic blogger, James Delingpole, the significance of the apparent slowdown in global temperature rises since 1998. Both invitees were not disinterested parties to the debate or experts on the science.  It would have been more appropriate to invite two climate scientists with differing views on the significance of the slowdown.16. A more pressing issue than the BBC’s coverage is the presence of climate sceptics (of different types) in the UK print media, and in particular the right-leaning tabloid press.   The RISJ 2011 study (Painter, 2011) of 5,000 articles in six countries in 2007 and 2009/10 showed that the UK’s press is similar to that of the USA in giving much more space to sceptical views than in the other four countries examined (Brazil, China, France and India).  Together the UK and the USA represented more than 80% of the times sceptical voices were quoted across all six countries.  17. Other key findings of this study relevant to the select committee’s questions are:18. The second period under examination (2009-10) was a time when a significant amount of media inclusion of climate sceptic voices could have been expected as it covered the time of ‘Climategate’ (when scientists at the climatic research unit at the University of East Anglia in the UK were accused of manipulating results and keeping critics out of science publications) and the questioning of some aspects of the 2007 IPCC reports.  However, further examination of articles on climate change in the UK press from a later period (2010-11) suggests that the presence of sceptic voices remained high at about one in five of all articles, despite a marked drop in the total number of articles covering the topic (Painter and Gavin, unpublished 2013).19. There are several reasons why it is important to reflect on the high presence of climate sceptic voices in the UK print media, and particularly the opinion pages.  The first is that much of the uncontested sceptic opinion is written by in-house columnists and not climate scientists.  This could give the impression to a general audience that climate science is a matter of opinion or merely ‘a point of view’, in the same way as many political issues are, without giving the readers a sense of what most climate scientists say is the case about rising temperatures and the causes of them.20. A second important aspect to consider is the effect on readers of the promulgation of uncertainty, and in particular the view often put forward by sceptics that there is significant disagreement amongst scientists.  There is evidence from a recent study carried out with focus groups in the UK that many people believe that there is a lack of consensus in scientific opinion, partly because this is frequently the way climate science is presented in the media.  The participants thought that scientists are often in disagreement with each other or change their mind over time (Shuckburgh et al, 2012).  21.  Moreover, research carried out by communications scholars in the USA suggests that uncertainty generated - deliberately or not - in peoples’ minds about the level of agreement amongst scientists can make a big difference for engagement.  People who (wrongly) believe that scientists disagree on global warming tend to feel less certain that global warming is occurring, and show less support for climate policy (Ding Ding et al., 2011).  Likewise, the lead author of the research done by the Glasgow Media Group found that in their focus groups in the UK, ‘the uncertainty of the science left the evidence open to interpretation by a range of experts.&#xa0; Participants said they were very reliant on these interpretations due to the complexity of the subject, and yet found it difficult to place faith in any of them – hence stalemate, and disengagement.’ (Catherine Happer quoted in Painter, 2013) 22. A 2013 study by the RISJ (Painter, 2013) suggests that risk language can in certain circumstances and with certain groups be a more helpful of talking about climate change than uncertainty, and particularly for policy makers.  It is certainly the language now being used by a wide variety of politicians and scientific reports on climate change. 23. Part of the challenge is that scientific uncertainty is often misunderstood, particularly by the general public, and misinterpreted as ignorance.  For example, many people fail to recognise the distinction between ‘school science’, which is a source of solid facts and reliable understanding, and ‘research science’ where uncertainty is engrained and is often the impetus for further investigation. Risk on the other hand is an essential part of everyday experience, including the worlds of insurance, health and investment.   23.  The RISJ 2013 study, which looked at more than 300 articles on climate change in the print media in six countries, found that the media on the whole overwhelmingly use a narrative of ‘disasters’ and ‘uncertainty’, when reporting climate change. The language of risk (and of opportunity) was much less prevalent.  Studies show that disaster and uncertainty frames – at least in their more extreme forms - are not usually seen as enhancing public understanding, engagement or behaviour change (Moser and Dilling 2004, O’Neill and Nicholson-Cole, 2010).  24. 

[[[Recommendations]]]More research is needed into the effect of certain messages about climate change in the media and elsewhere on public understanding, engagement and behaviour change. It is often wrongly assumed that simply giving the public more information about climate science will promote ‘better’ engagement, when most communication theory suggests that most people filter information about climate science through their cultural values.  Dialogue and discussion are often more effective than top-down information. Scientific uncertainty about climate change (for example, the timing, severity and location of future impacts) is particularly difficult to convey without confusing the public. More work needs to be done on testing what sort of messages and language might help with what sectors of society, and whether risk is a more productive language.In the specific area of risk and uncertainty communication, for the media, For scientists,In general, &#xa0;

[[[References]]]Donald, Ros, ‘Polling reveals public trust scientists most on climate’, Carbon Brief, 2 April 2013. Ding Ding et al, ‘Support for climate policy and societal action are linked to perceptions about scientific agreement’, Letter to Nature, December 2011. Glasgow Media Group, ‘Climate Change and Energy Security: Assessing the Impact of Information and its Delivery on Attitudes and Behaviour’, UK Energy Research Centre, London 2012.Moser, Susanne and Dilling, L (2004), ‘Making climate hot; communicating the urgency and challenge of global climate change’, Environment, 46, pp. 32-46. &#xa0;Newman Nic and Levy D., Digital News Report 2013, RISJ, Oxford 2013.O’Neill, Saffron and Nicholson-Cole, S. (2009) ‘"Fear won't do it": promoting positive engagement with climate change through visual and iconic representations’, Science Communication, 30, 355-379Painter James, Summoned by Science: Reporting Climate Change at Copenhagen and Beyond, RISJ, Oxford 2010.Painter James, Poles Apart: The international reporting of climate skepticism, RISJ, Oxford 2011.Painter James, Climate Change in the Media: reporting risk and uncertainty, RISJ/I.B. Tauris, Oxford, forthcoming 2013. Painter James and Ashe T., ‘Cross-national comparison of the presence of climate scepticism in the print media in six countries, 2007–10’, 2012 Environ. Res. Lett. 

[[[7]]] 044005Painter James and Gavin N. ‘Climate scepticism in the British press’, unpublished manuscript 2013.&#xa0;Poortinga, Wouter, et al, ‘Uncertain climate: An investigation into public scepticism about anthropogenic climate change’, Global Environmental Change 21 (3) (2011), pp. 1015–24.&#xa0;Shuckburgh, Emily, et al., ‘Climate Science, the Public and the News Media: Summary Findings of a Survey and Focus Groups Conducted in the UK in March 2011’, London: Living With Environmental Change, 2012.August 2013&#xa0;