&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Kent County Council ]]]

[[[(CLC058) ]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]Executive Summary &#xa0;Kent County Council is providing written evidence to the Committee in response to a request for information from Elena Ares (Committee Specialist) on the following: &#xa0;1. Our views on the level of understanding about climate change science amongst the public, and whether it matters. 2. What Kent is doing on climate change and why; what the focus is when it comes talking to the public, together with our experience of what is effective or not when communicating at a local level. 3. Whether Kent engages, and how, with other LA’s and Government bodies on this. &#xa0;This will be followed by an oral submission by Mr Paul Crick, Director of Planning and Environment, Kent County Council on 11th September 2013. &#xa0;Kent County Council is one of the largest councils in the country and provides more than 300 services for around 1.6 million residents. The Council runs a number of programmes relating to climate change, interacting with communities and businesses on a regular basis. &#xa0;In the main we find that the public have a good awareness of climate change and this is very much based on information provided through the mainstream media and where it is taught in schools (and passed on within families). However, we have found through our engagement that although communities are aware, detailed understanding of climate change and the influences upon it are often very mixed. Although the vast majority of scientists have reached a consensus on climate change, there is often a disproportionate focus in the media on uncertainty and scepticism, which although crucial to meaningful debate, to a layperson gives the impression that it is a confused picture and doesn’t motivate action. This has been backed up by our engagement on the subject with many residents citing uncertainty as a reason to not take action. In general however, we have found that the majority of the public accept that climate change is an issue and one that needs to be addressed. Where there is significant confusion is who, how and when. Climate change is still very much seen as a far future issue whilst people have very immediate and pressing concerns now. It is important to note that in our experience people in the main view climate change as a responsibility of Local and Central Government and struggle to see what they can do on an individual level. We have found a key part of making climate change a more immediate concern is to increase our understanding of how we are currently impacted by severe weather events and use this as a conduit to wider discussion on how an increase in occurrence and severity of these events may influence Kent. &#xa0;Kent County Council has increasingly found the need to provide an interface between the science and our partners and residents. We use the science and national and local drivers to identify key priorities for Kent and communicate those appropriately as the resource is not always available across partner organisations to be able to do this. &#xa0;It is very clear from our engagement is that people are not overly interested in the detail, they know the headlines and they want to know what they can do about it. In fact we have developed detailed local information on the science but it disengages the majority of those we have worked with. &#xa0;We have found that the most successful tools and techniques for engaging on this issue are: o Focussing on the outcomes and tailoring the messages appropriately. Is the detailed science needed to reach the aims? o Keeping information very local to make it relevant to an individual or community. o Local maps and aerial photos work well to draw people into wider conversation. o Messages on change, historically as well as into the future to highlight that we are always adapting to changes. o Looking at potential future scenarios to make it more tangible. o Identifying example actions for communities to build on for their area so that clear steps can be seen in how we prepare for change. A report we commissioned from University of Kent, School of Psychology clearly highlighted that it is vital that communities have some tangible actions they can take to ensure that it is a ‘challenge’ that can be addressed and not a ‘threat’. &#xa0;&#xa0;Kent County Council is focussed on the delivery of outcomes and would question whether it is necessary for the detailed climate science to be fully understood by everyone in order to achieve carbon savings and build resilience. It is important that we understand the science to inform our work programmes and priorities but, once identified, how we communicate will vary. What is essential is for Central Government to be very clear on their priorities, based on the climate science, and have strong focussed messages and policies which Local Government can then apply in a locally appropriate way. &#xa0;

[[[Introduction ]]]1. Kent County Council is one of the largest councils in the country and provides more than 300 services for around 1.6 million residents. The Council is committed to ensuring that our services are resource efficient, use energy smartly and prepare for a changing climate. We also recognise that we have an important role to help our residents and businesses to capture the opportunities and benefits of action on climate change. These include saving money on energy bills, generating income from renewable energy, attracting new jobs and investment in ‘green’ industries, supporting new sources of energy, managing local flood-risk and water scarcity and protecting our natural environment. Our Kent Environment Strategy lays out our approach to ensuring we meet our commitments publicly laid out in Climate Local Kent. &#xa0;2. Kent County Council runs a number of programmes relating to climate change, interacting with communities and businesses on a regular basis. The level to which climate change science is discussed is dependent on whether this level of information would influence the outcome. For example, an SME does not need detailed understanding of climate science to save money on their energy bills through being more resource efficient or to build resilience to flooding. Further information is provided throughout this document. &#xa0;

[[[3. Our views on the level of understanding about climate change science amongst the public, and whether it matters. ]]]&#xa0;4. Kent County Council is focussed on the delivery of outcomes and would question whether it is necessary for the detailed climate science to be fully understood by everyone in order to achieve carbon savings and build resilience. It is important that we, as a local authority, understand the science to inform our work programmes and priorities but, once identified, how we communicate these will vary. 5. What is essential is for Central Government to be very clear on their priorities, based on the climate science, which Local Government can then apply in a locally appropriate way. For example, Kent County Council has been involved in the development of the National Adaptation Programme (informed by the national CCRA) and is addressing the recommendations through the Kent Environment Strategy. 6. Kent County Council recognise that the impacts of climate change will not be the same across the UK and so local expertise to build the evidence base and take forward priorities identified is important, however increasingly limited resources and lack of statutory drivers from Central Government can make this difficult. 7. Kent County Council is a partner in an Interreg IVA 2 Seas project entitled Coastal Communities 2150 (led by the Environment Agency). This project looks to engage local communities in planning for future environmental and coastal change and as such, the project looks to provide communities with the information they need to make decisions for their area, including locally relevant information on climate change. 8. Officers attend events in three priority communities (identified through a review of vulnerability around the Kent coastline) to gather input from a range of community members. Events include carnivals, open days and fetes to try and capture as much input as possible. Through this we have spoken with at least 500 people on climate change, presented at meetings and seminars to another 500 and have had 2,400 hits on our website. In addition, pop ups are placed in areas of high footfall such as supermarkets and community centres. From working with the public in this way, we have had the opportunity to interact with a wide range of community members and get their insight into their areas and what climate change might mean for them. 9. In the main we find that community members have had a greater awareness of climate change than had been anticipated and this is very much based on information provided through the mainstream media. However, we have found that although communities are aware, detailed understanding of climate change and the influences upon it are often very mixed with people taking away the messages from the media that align the most to their viewpoints. 10. Although the vast majority of scientists have reached a consensus on climate change, there is often a disproportionate focus in the media on uncertainty and scepticism, which although crucial to meaningful debate, to a layperson gives the impression that it is a confused picture and doesn’t motivate action. 11. From our experience there are four apparent groupings around views on climate change (in descending size order):&#xa0;a. Those who are aware of climate change, our influence on it and what the main implications are likely to be. b. Those who are aware of climate change but do not see it as something we influence and we therefore cannot control it. Often stating that this is part of longer climate cycle and is inevitable. c. Those who do not accept that climate change is occurring or an issue. d. Those who are not aware of climate change at all (very rare). &#xa0;12. The different groups influence how we engage. For instance, both of the first two groups are interested in building resilience as, regardless of human influence, there is acceptance that change is occurring and we need to plan for this. However, when it comes to mitigation it is the first group who are more likely to be interested in energy efficiency and renewable energy deployment in relation to climate change, for all other groups the messaging becomes more around saving (and generating) money. 13. For the third group, in addition to saving money we use messages a lot more around severe weather and its implications. That is, we are not currently as well prepared as we could be and the need to plan better for flooding, drought, heat waves etc. 14. In general, we have found that the vast majority accept that climate change is an issue and one that needs to be addressed. Where there is significant confusion is who, how and when. Climate change is still very much seen as a far future issue whilst people have very immediate and pressing concerns now. 15. The fact that we are 

[[[currently ]]]seeing changes and need to prepare for these is not getting through, although recent severe weather events around the world (despite it being unclear whether these can be wholly attributed to climate change), is increasing this awareness. Many are also seeing change in their areas, highlighting growing patterns and biodiversity in particular. 16. It is clear from our engagement is that people are not overly interested in the detailed science, they know the headlines and they want to know what they can do about it. In fact we have developed detailed information on the science for our projects, but it disengages the majority of those we have worked with. However it is useful for us to have so we can answer questions as they arise and build trust with our residents. 17. This is supported by the report by University of Kent whereby it was clearly highlighted that to engage on this issue, it is vital that communities have some tangible actions they can take to ensure that it is a ‘challenge’ that can be addressed and not a ‘threat’.18. It is important to note that in our experience people in the main view climate change as a responsibility of Local and Central Government and struggle to see what they can do on an individual level. &#xa0;

[[[19.What Kent is doing on climate change and why; what the focus is when it comes talking to the public, together with experience of what is effective or n]]]

[[[ot when communicating at a local level. ]]]&#xa0;20. At a strategic level, Kent Leaders have committed to Climate Local Kent, building on the LGA’s Climate Local initiative. This is a public commitment with targets relating to carbon, water, waste and resilience to climate change and this, along with our Kent Environment Strategy, commit us to delivering on actions that relate to climate change. Our Environment Strategy is also a priority for delivery in Bold Steps for Kent, our community strategy, and as such is committed to at the highest level. &#xa0;21. To inform our priorities in relation to climate change we have used climate change science to focus our work and identify those areas we need to address, but once the evidence base is identified we communicate in a different way in order to get buy in to actions. When communicating at a local level we are informed by the audience concerned to ensure that messages work for them. 22. In addition, there are a number of wider drivers for action on climate change, such as our role as Lead Local Flood Authority in place through the Flood and Water Management Act (2010); the National Planning Policy Framework; the CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme and the Natural Environment White Paper amongst others. 23. Below is a summary of some of our projects and how we interact with the public and the main focus for communication. These projects are examples with significant public or partnership interaction but this is by no means an exhaustive list of the work of Kent County Council in relation to climate change. We would be happy to provide further examples on request in relation to any of our projects within the Kent Environment Strategy. 

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[24. Severe Weather Impacts Monitoring System (SWIMS) ]]]25. We have found a key part of making climate change a more immediate concern, not just for the public but for our own services, is to increase our understanding of how we are currently impacted by severe weather events across our organisation and those of our partners. To this end we have developed SWIMS to capture the impacts and responses as and when severe weather events occur. 26. We also use the information gathered with the UKCP09 weather generator to identify potential cost avoidance into the future. This requires quite specialist knowledge and skills and we find that the weather generator is not overly accessible unless the resources are available in an organisation to spend time interrogating the data. 27. The information we gather informs our programmes, partnership working and also messages and information across our projects in Kent. 28. SWIMS is now being rolled out nationally through ClimateUK as part of the Climate Ready programme. 29. 

[[[Messages u]]]

[[[sed: ]]]We are not currently as prepared as we could be; severe weather costs us over £862,000 per year; building the evidence base; cost: benefit analysis of action; cost avoidance from preparing for increased frequency and severity of events; better use of resources and partnership working. 

[[[30. Our website and Kent View:]]]

[[[ ]]]31. Our website is our front face to the public in relation to climate change. Our pages cover a range of information and we have tried to cater for varying degrees of interest. There are opportunities to find out more on the climate science but this is introduced in a basic way, covering what it means for us locally. Links are provided to the more detailed science and to recognised experts in the area such as the Met Office, Defra and UKCIP. In addition we ensure that there are tangible steps residents can take to prepare. 32. We have also mapped out the climate projections (UKCP09) on to our systems to 25km2 in order to make it more locally appropriate to our residents (Kent View) and these maps are interactive and available to all either through Kent View or the CC2150 website. 

[[[33. Messages used: ]]]Varies as there is the opportunity to go as deeply into the science as a resident would like. What it means for Kent and what can be done to prepare are also key areas. &#xa0;

[[[34. Warm Homes ]]]35. The Warm Homes programme is related to the Energy Company Obligation (ECO) and Green Deal and through partnering with Enterprise and NPower the programme aims to bring £80m of ECO funding into the county, as well as supporting and encouraging low carbon businesses. This programme directly relates to climate change mitigation through the reduction of emissions in the domestic sector (in the main, although some community buildings are being retrofitted). 36. Mitigating climate change would only appeal to a minority of our residents and so has not been the focus of our communications. Regardless of whether we discuss climate change or not, the outcomes from the project are the same and so we do not feel that it needs to be specifically referred to and could turn some people off. 37. 

[[[Messages used]]]: The Warm Homes programme refers to Saving Energy, Saving Money and uses phrasing such as Take your first steps to a warmer, more comfortable home. We have found that these kinds of messages are more likely to be taken up rather than carbon saving or climate science. 

[[[38. Coastal Communities 2150 ]]]39. This project has been detailed previously but during the initial stages of developing communications we have worked with the University of Kent’s School of Psychology to review the barriers to communication on climate change. This resulted in some core principles which have underpinned the project overall: 40. Uncertainty in community engagement can be overcome by; e. Provision of authoritative yet accessible (visual) science f. Outlining specific, local examples of impact to provide context and assign responsibility g. Highlighting specific opportunities and benefits to the community (if any) h. Publically acknowledging any uncertainties and attributing a cause &#xa0;&#xa0;41. The threat of perceived change can be overcome by;i. Communicating the evidence and inevitability of change in a local context and therefore acting to demonstrate a proven ability of communities to adapt j. Communicating the ‘challenge’ and not the ‘threat’ of climate change to highlight a solvable problem rather than impending ruin k. Encouraging adaptation rather than mitigation approaches to highlight that action would still be needed to maintain the status quo (if indeed this is possible). &#xa0;&#xa0;42. We have found that the most successful tools and techniques for engaging on this issue are:l. Keeping information very local to make it relevant to an individual or community. m. Local maps and aerial photos work well to draw people into wider conversation. n. Messages on change, historically as well as into the future to highlight that we are always adapting to changes. o. Looking at potential future scenarios to make it more tangible. p. Identifying example actions for communities to build on for their area so that clear steps can be seen in how we prepare for change. &#xa0;&#xa0;43. It has been key to make clear, concise messages to maximise engagement, where we have used more detailed science it has proven off-putting to the majority.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[44. Low Carbon Kent ]]]45. Kent County Council has identified the low carbon sector as a priority growth area, but in addition to this, we work to improve businesses’ opportunities to reduce costs and build resilience. Businesses are given the opportunity to influence policies to enhance Kent’s economic potential as well as become part of a Low Carbon Kent network, currently at 1270 members. In addition a Steps to Environmental Management (STEM) scheme is offered to help businesses develop and implement environmental management systems and this has resulted in cost reduction for businesses of £962,000 and 2,000 tonnes of CO2e saved. This also incorporates building resilience to climate change. 46. In 2013, Kent County Council ran a survey of over 5,000 businesses on their attitudes to severe weather (part of a project funded through Defra on whether SWIMS would be appropriate for businesses). 78% of businesses were concerned by the impacts of severe weather but felt it was not relevant and saw it very much as the responsibility of Central and Local Government. Again, like the general public, businesses (and in particular SMEs) wanted to know what the main impacts are, how it affects them financially and the actions they should take. They also responded that they would like a clearly defined approach from Central Government. The detailed science was not of interest to the majority. 47. As part of the Low Carbon Kent Programme, we have historically looked to run workshops on building resilience to climate change but have found that interest in this is very limited with reasons similar to those raised by community members, i.e., more pressing concerns. 48. How we have looked to address this is through linking climate change to business continuity and focussing on those areas at greatest risk or with more opportunities, either geographically or through the sector they work in. It is also important to draw in information from recognised sector experts, such as the Chartered Management Institute (CMI). 49. We would not at this stage say that these interactions are as successful as we would like them to be and so are moving our focus to our supply chains and those of the partners we work with. It is imperative that KCC can deliver services now and into the future, and our supply chain is a key component of that. 50. 

[[[Focus used: ]]]Save money; business continuity; low carbon opportunities for growth; resilience; supply chain 

[[[51. Sustainable Sheppey and Community Ene]]]

[[[rgy ]]]52. Another community project being run in Kent is through the Communities Living Sustainably Fund from the Big Lottery. The Sustainable Sheppey project again looks to identify community opportunities and risks from climate change. There are a number of work streams, one of which links to CC2150, but in addition there is a community energy project whereby communities will be given the funding for feasibility studies for renewable energy technologies of interest for their area. 53. This project is community led from the outset and we are asking residents on the Isle of Sheppey to identify technologies they would want to progress. We do not discuss climate science in this project unless more information is requested. 54. 

[[[Focus used: ]]]Income generation; locally-led projects; opportunities; energy security&#xa0;

[[[55. How Kent County Council engages with other local authorities and Government bodies on climate change. ]]]&#xa0;56. Kent County Council works across a range of partner organisations and further developing and improving our partnership working is a key priority for the county. For example, Climate Local Kent incorporates all Districts and Boroughs in the county as well as the Environment Agency, Kent Fire and Rescue Service, NHS and Kent Police amongst others. 57. Governance across the county on climate change has been clearly defined with a Kent Environment Strategy Executive Officers Group and the Kent Climate Change Network. The former incorporates Environment Directors from County and District Councils as well as Natural England, the Environment Agency, Business Link, Kent Wildlife Trust and the AONB. The Network consist of lead officers from across Districts and Boroughs, NHS, Police, Fire and Rescue Service and the Environment Agency. 58. The Council is also represented on the Local Adaptation Advisory Panel (LAAP) and the Climate Local Steering Group and has provided input into areas such as the National Adaptation Programme and Climate Local. 59. Kent County Council utilises climate projections on a regular basis and has mapped these on to our own systems to inform our work programmes. We have increasingly found the need to provide an interface between the detailed science and our partners and residents. We use the science and national and local priorities to identify key priorities, issues and headlines for Kent as the resource is not always available in each individual partner organisation to be able to do this. 60. We also work with partners on a project specific basis. For example, work is currently underway with the Environment Agency and URS to develop a Water Resilience Framework for Kent. URS are working with climate science and projections, data from ourselves and the Environment Agency (amongst others) to identify how climate change, as well as population change, will influence the availability of water in the county as we are already a water scarce region. 61. In addition, a major partnership scheme, the £20m Sandwich Town Tidal Defence Scheme, is now underway. This scheme increases flood protection from a 1 in 20 chance of tidal flooding each year to 1 in 200 for 488 homes and 94 commercial properties in Sandwich. The scheme has been jointly funded by Government, Kent County Council and Pfizer and is one of the first to use Defra’s new partnership approach to funding flood defence schemes. 62. As an organisation we also regularly review available information and keep up to speed on developments in our role as coordinators of the Kent Environment Strategy. Information we use comes from the UK Climate Impacts Programme, Climate Ready, Climate Local and the New Scientist amongst many others.&#xa0;August 2013&#xa0; Sutton R. et al., (2012) Engaging coastal communities in climate mitigation and adaptation measures. Unpublished report commissioned by Kent County Council for the CC2150 project. http://www.kent.gov.uk/environment_and_planning/environment_and_climate_change/kent_environment_strategy.aspx https://shareweb.kent.gov.uk/Documents/environment-and-planning/environment-and-climate-change/Climate%20Change%20web%20pages/New%20climate%20change%20pages/Climate%20Local%20Commitment.pdf www.kentcoastalcommunities2150.org.uk  Sutton R. et al., (2012) Engaging coastal communities in climate mitigation and adaptation measures. Unpublished report commissioned by Kent County Council for the CC2150 project. www.kent.gov.uk/climatechange Further information on all these schemes are available at: http://www.lowcarbonkent.com/ Further information on the project is available at www.kent.gov.uk/sustainablesheppey.