&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by David Fogarty (CLC0062)]]]The following is a submission to the UK Parliament’s Select Committee on “Climate: public understanding and its policy implications”. I am writing this in my personal capacity as a specialist science and environment writer. I was the climate change correspondent for Thomson Reuters in Asia (2008-13) and I’m now a media consultant and writer focusing on environmental issues. I started writing about climate change in the late 1980s. The following comments are for the public record.SummaryQ: Are there particular difficulties when reporting complex science areas such as climate science? A specialist climate science/climate change reporter should have no more difficulty covering their beat than other specialist correspondents. Climate science is complex but no more so than, for instance, mergers and acquisitions, specialist criminal or business law or international trade. Reporters should have a background that allows them to understand the technical details of the main issues of their beat; be able to quickly distinguish what is new and therefore news and what isn’t; have credible contacts who can offer insight on developments and offer contrasting opinions to help readers better understand any key developments. What makes climate stories interesting and publishable?Q: Has there been a loss of scientific and environmental expertise in newspapers and news agencies? What has been the impact of this for the coverage of climate science?&#xa0;Q: Has there been a change in climate science and policy news coverage in the UK recent years? If so why do you think this is?  How effective is the press in the UK at distinguishing legitimate concerns about climate and energy policies and less accurate criticisms of the science?Q: Do you have a view on the reasons James Painter found in his research that the UK and US press represent 80% of sceptical voices in the countries he included in his study?&#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;