&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[Gwenda]]]

[[[ Ward [WAS0006]]]]&#xa0;Women's disadvantage in sport is a huge topic crossing into many different areas.  I would like to contribute to one, “reasons why participation by women decreases.”  Again this is a very wide topic and issues will vary from sport to sport – around some global themes which also link into the other topic areas, especially funding, media and PE.&#xa0;Anna Kessel's recent piece on the difficulties faced by female coaches (Culture of sexism blamed for lack of top-level female coaches in UK; Guardian,  Sept 5th 13) could have been written in 1991 when I was asked, as a volunteer, to set up the Women's Advisory Group by the then British Athletics Federation. The group did some excellent work, but disbanded in 1995 due to our recommendations being ignored and there has been no discernible progress since in making athletics a more “friendly” environment for women and girls.&#xa0;Female under-represented in decision-making has got worse since 1991 and the issues for women in coaching have remained the same.  This means that there is still no voice on gender in strategy - where the needs and priorities for developing the sport come from the traditional “by men for men” perspective, but which is actually seen as a norm rather than a gendered view.  So, there is no guidance for clubs, coaches and parents on keeping mid to late teen girls in the sport and little or no organisational recognition of the social pressures on girls and the detailed effects of their different maturational rates – although obviously individual coaches know this very well, but are left to re-invent the wheel and cope individually.    There has been extensive work on prevention and action on eating disorders in endurance running but little of it is visible or been incorporated in practice. There is no challenge to casual sexism among professionals and volunteers, there is no recognition of inherent gender bias in voting systems for regional and national councils, there is no recognition of women's differing career patterns and therefore no strategy to actively recruit women into volunteering at an appropriate time, and, most crucially of all, there is no challenge to professional recruitment practices that favour male candidates, or to the bullying and excluding culture of the governing bodies which now, as opposed to the nineties -  makes challenge impossible.  &#xa0;If athletics is ever to get the baton round safely on gender equity it needs to acknowledge that its governing bodies, like any organisation dominated by an unrepresentative power group which unwittingly or carelessly perpetuates a culture and procedures which reflect the needs of those in power and which make the contributions of other groups – women or ethnic minorities for example – seem deficient. Those male dominated cultures are endemic in sport, and difficult to change. UKA's over reliance on voluntary coaches at all levels other than the super-elite,  exacerbates the problem, but it is crucial too that UKA and England Athletics address their organisational biases. They have recruited many overseas coaches – all male – and appointed very highly paid executives – again all male – who have no experience or interest in handling pressing diversity issues in a complex organisation. Organisation gender bias is masked by the resulting actual imbalance in numbers – for example in coaching at levels 3 and 4.  So, as the Peter Stanley (UK Athletics' new head of coaching development) quote in Kessel's piece confirms, they are free to keep doing it their way and blaming gender imbalance on female inexperience – and UK Sport keeps allowing them to do it. Meanwhile some excellent women coaches at Levels 3 and 4 have been left sidelined and undervalued.  If athletics had simply taken a hard look at its recruitment procedures for gender bias in 1991, the dearth of women in coaching and decision making - and the massive loss of able teenage girls from the sport, might have been largely solved by now. They need to be forced to do this now, and to change athletics from a sport that casually accepts the disadvantage of women and minority groups, into an organisation that actively promotes and manages for balance and diversity.&#xa0;&#xa0;Gwenda WardEx Olympic athlete.  Ex PE Teacher.  First honorary secretary to Women's Advisory Group for Athletics (then BAF) 1991.  Sat on IAAF Women's Committee 2004 – 7.  Chair, UKA Valuing Diversity Gender sub committee 2003-7.  Wrote “Coaching Women and Girls Module for then UKA coach education programme.   Writer and campaigned on gender issues and sport.  L 2 athletics coach.  Currently studying for M.Sc in Emotional Well-being and Sport, University of Cumbria.&#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;