&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Dr Richard Lawson (CLC0063)]]]Written evidence submitted by Dr Richard Lawson, a retired General Practitioner of medicine and Green Party activist (one of the first Greens to be elected to a local authority), author of Bills of Health (Radcliffe 1996), on the impact of political and economic conditions on NHS spending. I have been debating climate science with climate sceptics on the web over the past four years.It is well known that the debate over anthropogenic climate change is deeply polarised. At the extreme of the side that rejects the scientific consensus are a group who are implacably opposed to accepting any part of mainstream climate science. Every point of science, whether it be the greenhouse effect, the physics of CO2, or the possibility that we could decarbonise the economy, is vehemently contested, and no coherent case is put forward for an integrated view of the planet’s energy budget.  These “sceptics” believe that climatology has been almost universally corrupted by a political conspiracy whose aim is to raise taxes for the sake of raising taxes, destroy Western capitalism and usher in a totalitarian New World Order. &#xa0;It is pointless to debate with these people, just as it is pointless to debate with a creationist.  &#xa0;However, over the past few years there has emerged a group of climate sceptics called  Lukewarmers. They do accept a large part of the scientific basis of climatology, but they believe that the effect of greenhouse gas emissions will be minor rather than catastrophic. Lukewarmers have penetrated into the political establishment in the UK, and occupy more than one position of authority in the present Government. Lukewarmers accept that the Greenhouse Effect exists,&#xa0;and that CO2 is a greenhouse gas. They accept that a doubling of CO2 will produce a global temperature increase (eventually, when equilibrium is re-established) in the vicinity of 1C. They accept that Climate Sensitivity (CS) means that this increase will be amplified to some extent, but believe that the eventual equilibrium  temperature for a doubling will lie between 1 and 2C. Mainstream climatologists on the other hand believe that CS means that a doubling of  CO2 will cause an eventual temperature rise of 2-4.There is therefore a common temperature increase of two degrees Centigrade  which both sides of the debate agree is a possible outcome. The figure lies at the top end of the range of that accepted by sceptics, and at the lowest end of the range accepted by climatologists, but nevertheless, it is accepted as possible by both sides.Major changes flow from the insight that 2 degrees is accepted by both sides. The debate becomes simplified and comprehensible to the person of average intelligence. Instead of ranging across the whole immensely complex field of earth systems, it focuses on these three major points:&#xa0;Furthermore, in terms of scientific method, a classic Popperian refutation becomes possible. The lukewarmers are putting forward a testable hypothesis, that anthropogenic greenhouse gases have a minor effect. This hypothesis can be tested, both in terms of whether their evidence for low sensitivity is robust, and also whether their estimates of the effects of a 2C temperature rise, which they accept is possible, can in fact be classed as trivial and tolerable.&#xa0;The emerging scientific discipline of  “Attribution” becomes relevant here. If it is possible to attribute extreme weather events to anthropogenic changes at the present level of warming (0.7C), it becomes very clear that an increase of 2C could not be regarded as trivial.&#xa0;This testability of the lukewarmers sceptics’ case gives us the opportunity to conclude the first phase of the climate debate, regarding the seriousness of the effects of CO2, so that we can move forward to determining and implementing the best policies for decarbonising the global economy.&#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;