&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ITM Power PLC (HOT55)]]]&#xa0;1. Electrical and thermal power demands vary substantially with time of day and time of year. Electricity demands show some seasonal variation while heat demands are a strong function of weather conditions and exhibit a marked seasonal trend. In buildings and industrial processes, heat and power demands coincide to some extent but the respective demand profiles are rarely coupled in a steady ratio. Their time varying magnitudes are driven by human behaviour at work and at leisure - the need for power being a complex function of the electrical equipment in use, while the need for heat is driven by thermal comfort, hot water or thermal process requirements. Decarbonising electricity and heat requires an understanding of these demand profiles, so that the implemented national solution can achieve a desired profile shape rather than exacerbate existing peaks and troughs. In an ideal world, flat demand profiles year-round for heat and power would facilitate decarbonisation at least cost. But in reality what we need to do is engineer solutions that smooth demand profiles, by filling "valleys" and not increasing "peaks". It is important that this principle is followed when considering how to load the future electricity and gas grids to achieve low-carbon variants of both. At present the adoption of some low-carbon solutions (heat pumps, BEVs and PHEVs) may achieve the exact opposite because the timing of their use is driven by human behaviour. Therefore new solutions are required.&#xa0;2. The admission of increasing amounts of renewable power into the electricity grid, &#xa0;with its characteristic time varying and intermittent generation profile, exacerbates supply/demand matching. Similarly the admission of more base load nuclear or CCS plant will exacerbate supply/demand matching. The residual load profile (total minus renewable minus base load nuclear/CCS), which needs to be met with heat engines (mainly gas and steam turbines) will become increasingly variable. Thermal plant must comprise a significant proportion of the total generation on-line at any time to maintain grid stability. Smoothing the residual load profile is key to maintaining grid stability in a low carbon power system and there are three primary options for achieving this. First, shed renewable power; this is the conventional approach, it wastes renewable energy and undermines the existing and future investment cases - we need to break away from this convention. Second, store renewable energy whenever there is an excess and reconvert it to power at a later stage to reduce the peaks in the residual load profile; this power-in/power-out "energy storage" approach has been widely proposed and there are several technological options for achieving it, but they are lossy and capitally expensive. Third, a new approach termed "power to gas" (P2G) which involves converting excess renewable energy via the electrolysis of water to hydrogen and using it to help meet heat (not power) loads; this approach avoids the inefficiencies of reconverting stored energy to power and can utilise the existing gas grid to convey a mixed gas of lower carbon footprint than natural gas.&#xa0;3. The operating regime of P2G systems is driven by the need to absorb excess renewable energy and sell output gas to the existing gas grid. Price duration curves for future years tend to show periods of very low and sometimes negative electricity price due to the increasing integration of renewables. UK wind farm operators are currently paid to curtail generation, so the wasted electricity is of negative value. As a technological approach for reducing this wastage, the electricity costs (£/MWh) for operating P2G should at worst be zero and at best be negative. This implies that the P2G system must respond rapidly to avert or minimise the amount of renewable energy that would otherwise be curtailed as it occurs. By definition the gas it generates at these times is zero-carbon hydrogen and it is of low cost.&#xa0;4. Supply/demand matching involves balancing both frequency and voltage to stay within the tolerances required by an AC grid serving millions of items of electrical equipment. As more renewables are integrated both frequency and voltage can rise at times and when this happens it would be very useful if demand on the system could be increased immediately. Similarly if a generator trips, it is useful to immediately decrease demand on the system. It is very important that the response time to an instruction to increase/decrease load is very short (&lt;2s for frequency response). P2G systems based on PEM electrolyser technology can respond within 1s and so can offer these types of balancing service to the grid operator. Payment arrangements for availability and utilisation can provide a P2G system with an income stream, which serves to decrease the cost of the hydrogen it produces. P2G therefore provides a new tool for grid operators to better manage both renewables and supply/demand matching. Indeed the P2G approach should be viewed as a major "valley filling" tool (so enabling the greater integration of renewable power without curtailment) and a major means for maintaining grid stability in future power systems with high proportions of renewables or nuclear/CCS base load.&#xa0;&#xa0;5. The operating periods of P2G need not necessarily be restricted to periods of excess energy or balancing services requirement. Provided that the utilisation of expensive peak time electricity is avoided, additional electricity can be purchased and converted to hydrogen at the expense of running costs and the carbon footprint of the hydrogen. If "green" hydrogen is defined to have a low, rather than zero, carbon footprint (as suggested by TUV in Germany) then a greater yield of hydrogen can be produced per MW of P2G. Also it is important to note that plant utilisation can be increased in future years without exceeding a given carbon footprint, because the carbon intensity of the UK electricity grid will decrease considerably.&#xa0;&#xa0;6. Electricity distribution upgrades are often required to enable renewable power to flow geographically towards demand centres and planned wind farms are sometimes delayed/compromised/abandoned because of the costs of these upgrades. If a P2G plant can be implemented locally some of these electricity infrastructure reinforcement costs can be avoided. The P2G approach can provide certainty of electrical demand in time phase with wind/solar farm operation, so there are also opportunities to co-locate and increase the capacities of existing farms without stressing distribution networks. P2G therefore provides DNOs with a tool for managing renewables integration and distribution upgrades, and a means of maximising the capture of renewable energy in a region.&#xa0;7. The hydrogen produced by P2G in the way described may be dedicated to the gas grid, or to a gas-fired process. For a mixed gas the volume concentration of hydrogen must stay within limits of acceptability to ensure safety, performance and longevity for the gas pipeline, compression facilities and combustion technology. A concentration of 3% by volume has been identified as a near term stepping stone for the UK gas grid where the hydrogen is fed into the low pressure local distribution zones, because this concentration requires no changes to existing gas appliances, compressors, turbines or burners etc. The concentration limit must not be exceeded at any time and if the natural gas flow slows or stops (e.g. overnight in summer), the hydrogen flow must also slow or stop. This implies a need for some hydrogen buffering and/or occasional curtailment of the P2G system, because as with heat and power demands there is not a perfect coincidence between the excess energy availability profile and the natural gas consumption profile. Nevertheless these are relatively minor operational or system design constraints for P2G when compared with conventional wind curtailment.&#xa0;&#xa0;8. P2G takes a waste away from the electricity grid; it alleviates network constraints by delivering renewable energy "by pipe rather than by wire"; it serves to reduce the CO2 emissions of gas combustion and the CH4 emissions of gas transmission; it provides a renewable gas which is otherwise difficult to produce by other means; it improves national energy security. It is therefore reasonable to expect gas consumers to pay towards the costs of receiving a greener gas supply. The normal way of managing a green input to a grid in the UK is to apply a FIT and spread the cost across the associated energy consumers. A hydrogen FIT paid for by gas consumers should be introduced and arguably its value should depend on the greeness of the hydrogen being injected. The FIT effectively provides an income stream to the P2G operator, which when combined with the aforementioned modus operandi of absorbing excess energy and providing balancing services, enables the hydrogen cost to match that of wholesale natural gas.&#xa0;&#xa0;9. To achieve the 3% concentration level in the UK requires about 9TWh of hydrogen per annum, or about 12TWh of electricity for electrolysis. It is predicted that excess renewable energy levels will be around 10TWh in 2030, so a clear opportunity exists to capture this rather than waste it and develop a gas grid with a 97:3 NG:H2 mix. Far greater excess energy levels have been predicted for later years and there are three P2G approaches for utilising this. First, to aim for a higher hydrogen concentration level, such as 10 or 20%, and replace burners and end use equipment so that this mixed gas can be handled and combusted safely. Second, to apply P2G systems which combine CO2 and H2 to produce synthetic methane for injection into the gas grid, circumventing the compatibility issues but incurring an energy penalty compared with hydrogen injection. Third, to switch some thermal processes entirely from methane to hydrogen, so providing end users with maximum carbon savings in one step. These options, or a combination of them, warrant further analysis to identify how best to reduce the carbon footprint of gaseous fuel use with P2G systems so that the trajectory is compatible with achieving the 2050 emission targets.&#xa0;10. A policy framework is required to accelerate the uptake of P2G and ensure it is operated as outlined above to achieve synergistic benefits for the electricity and gas grids. This needs to address the following:&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;11. We have read and appreciate the submissions to DECC of Tony Day and Chris Goodall. We would commend others to consider their contributions in conjunction with the points we have made here.&#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;