&#xa0;Written evidence from Richard Wright (SLC 011)&#xa0;My name is Richard Wright and I am largely making this written submission of behalf of my 13-year-old grandson, James Matthew How, who was seriously injured in a level crossing accident at my farm in July 2010.Network Rail were fined a total of £500,000 in June this year, for their criminal negligence which led to James' life changing injuries in that accident when my truck was struck by a train at the crossing on my farm.ORR’s director of railway safety, Ian Prosser, said after the case at Ipswich Crown Court:“Our investigation found evidence that NR knew that level crossing on a private road near Beccles was unsafe for ten years and yet took no action. This led to the collision between a car and a train which left a 10-year-old boy with life changing injuries.“This is unacceptable from a company responsible for protecting the safety of millions of people on trains and at level crossings.”Obviously, myself and James' parents agree whole heartedly with the statement. What I want to do is to share with the committee just how incompetent and indifferent NR have been over the years, in dealing with my request to install a telephone at the crossing; a safety check which would have avoided this horrific accident which happened on a summer evening three years ago; an accident which changed all our lives forever.The telephone was finally installed in March 2011, some eight months after the accident. My efforts to get one installed, actually date back to the mid 1990s when I dealt with Railtrack, NR’s predecessor organisation which went out of business in 2002.But I will concentrate on my ten year struggle with NR, the subject of this enquiry. I could never quite understand why I did not have a level crossing telephone but the two farms on either side of the farm, on the same train line did.After numerous telephone calls, NR sent an employee with a stop watch to see if I qualified for a telephone, given the level of traffic on the line to Lowestoft. He stood in the middle of the track, wearing a fluorescent jacket, on a bright sunny day,  with a stop watch and waited for an approaching train.When the approaching driver sounded a warning signal, he started his stop watch and walked to the side of the track , then when the train passed he stopped the stop watch jumped to the side of the track. Based on this unusual quite antiquated test, he said I did not qualify for a track side telephone, even though we cross this line in all weather conditions.That appeared strange &amp; inconclusive to me. The real reason for NRs intransigence may simply have been the fact they did not want to spend the money.I have recently seen a copy of the minutes of the firm’s Anglia Level Crossing Team dated December 9 2005, less than a week after the double tragedy at Elsenham.It clearly shows that the team’s view is that it was simply cheaper to close farm level crossings than spend £20,000 on installing track side warning telephones.My view of safety being compromised for financial reasons was partly borne out by a letter I received out of the blue from NR in 2009 offering me £30,000 to close my level crossing. I rejected it pointing out that it was a vital route to the effective working of my whole farm. Without it, the farm was simply not viable. During a telephone conversation they increased the sum to £40,000.Even though I rejected their offer, they did not go on to install a telephone, the obvious alternative to closing the crossing.More than 20 years ago they turned up unannounced and installed signs on either side of the crossing saying a  telephone was now operating on the crossing with instructions for usage. They did not install one. About a year later I telephoned to inquire when a telephone would be installed.They sent out another team of staff to take down the signs and replace them with the original. But still no telephone.They didn’t impress me then and they don’t impress me now. If they had installed a track side telephone at my level crossing when they should have done, James would be a healthy 13-year-old looking to lead a full life.With his family’s love and support, he can live a happy life but not necessarily a full life as most of us understand it.&#xa0;We are still looking for answers from Network Rail as to why his life chances have been so sadly reduced. We want your committee to also find those answers to ensure no more families have to suffer like mine has, all because someone did not want to spend £20,000 on a track side telephone.September 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;