&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Written evidence from ]]]

[[[Transport Salaried Staffs’ Association (TSSA) (SLC 018)]]]&#xa0;

[[[Introduction]]]TSSA welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Transport Committee’s inquiry into safety at level crossings. If the Committee believes it would be helpful we would also be glad to meet with the Committee to further discuss our views.TSSA is an independent trade union with approximately 22,100 members working throughout the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland. Most TSSA members work in the railway industry – many thousands being employed by Network Rail undertaking a broad range duties mainly in what are traditionally referred to as ‘white collar’ jobs.  TSSA is recognised by Network Rail for collective bargaining purposes in supervisory, administrative, technical and managerial roles.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Response]]]The current risk assessment policies at Network Rail (NR) have evidently failed many communities and are no longer fit for purpose. We have sadly come to this conclusion over the past four years as repeated failures have seen rail users needlessly die and wrecked their families’ lives.We have reached this verdict having worked with some of those families as they have fought against massive odds for answers as to why their loved ones died and what was being done to ensure that others would not suffer as they have. For their efforts, they have often met with denial, obfuscation and bullying by NR and its large legal and PR departments.Level crossings have for some considerable time been considered to be the biggest risk in the rail industry. Despite this progress has been slow in terms of minimising the risk which they pose, and even slower in terms of reassuring the public and rail users.It took the families of two school girls who died at Elsenham in 2005 seven long years to find out it was NR’s criminal negligence that caused their daughters deaths. In 2013, NR were fined £1 million over the deaths that they has originally blamed on the girl’s reckless behaviour at an unsafe level crossing that they themselves should have made safe four years before the girls died on a Christmas shopping trip in December 2005.NR blamed two missing risk assessments, written in 2001 and 2002, for their negligence at Elsenham.As a union we believed that this would be a watershed in how level crossings were risk assessed and managed. However, at an inquest in April this year, over the death of 16-year-old Katie Littlewood at another unsafe crossing in Bishop’s Stortford, NR told a similar story of more missing documents.Like the two girls at Elsenham, Katie met her death in 2012 by passing through unlocked gates on to a busy line. But in 2007 NR had recognised the dangers and agreed to undertake a feasibility report to build a bridge over the crossing and permanently lock the gates.But that bridge was never built. NR told the inquest that the report “was lost between departments”.Within months of Katie’s death, the bridge was built and the gates closed. The same thing happened at Elsenham, two girls died and a bridge was built and the gates closed.Again at Hucknall in Nottingham, 13-year-old Lindsey Inger died in November last year, four years after the death of grandmother Jean Hoggart and her eight year old grandson Mickey. Within two months, NR had closed the crossing and locked the pedestrian gates on a crossing it had spent the previous four years arguing was safe.Action was only taken at these unsafe crossings after rail users needlessly died. Why does it take a death to make a crossing safe? We need a policy that prevents deaths and safeguards all rail users.Closure of public level crossings is notoriously difficult under the present law. Councils can be reluctant to close public footpaths as such decisions are invariably unpopular with specific sections of the public. One of the problems which NR faces in risk assessing level crossings is that if they identify a crossing as being unsafe and apply for closure and this is rejected, then NR have no option but to bridge the crossing as doing nothing about an unsafe crossing would normally not be an option. The costs associated with bridging are significant enough as to act as a disincentive to identifying the crossing as unsafe and running the risk that it won’t be closed. Network Rail will no doubt tell this Committee that it is now acting to spend over £100 million over three years to close over 700 of its most dangerous crossings. Many level crossings have been closed, although we suspect that many of the figures which NR quotes for closures were lower risk unused or rarely used footpaths.Things have certainly improved under current chief executive David Higgins but he is now leaving after three years in post. Our management staff members in NR inform us that David Higgins expressed the view that level crossings should be managed as a single asset. This seems an entirely logical response to the problems faced however it has not happened and instead we have Band 4 Level Crossing Managers who despite their title lack the authority to do anything beyond reporting increased risk which sometimes serves to place colleagues who originally assessed the risk under the spotlight.Throughout all the deaths on unsafe crossings over the past decade we have had the same operations director in charge, Robin Gisby. Mr Gisby had overall responsibility when Elsenham happened, when Hucknall happened, when Hereford happened and when Katie Littlewood died at Bishop’s Stortford last year. TSSA fears that what limited progress that has been made might well be reversed as maintenance budgets come under increasing pressure due to the cuts under the proposed Control Period 5 which might well lead to level crossings again becoming a lower priority for NR. With 6,500 level crossings on the oldest rail network in Europe, most of it built in Victorian times, the current management is facing a huge challenge given its taxpayer funded £4 billion annual budget.So how do we stop these tragedies happening again in the future? TSSA would like to see independent external examiners, i.e. not NR, undertake a detailed risk assessment of all 6,500 level crossings in the UK. We understand the cost implications of such a policy, which could take a year or more to complete, and we would ask, with your Committee’s support, the DfT to make extra funding available for this work. This could be delivered through the Railway Safety &amp; Standards Board (RSSB).The external examiners should then draw up a detailed list of the most dangerous 250 level crossings with an immediate closure programme following the completion of their safety audit.They would also list the next 250 most dangerous crossing for a rolling closure programme, and the next 250 and a further 250 so a total of 1,000 unsafe crossings would close within three years, i.e. 300 more than is currently being proposed by NR. This will need the Committee’s support to persuade the DfT to make extra funding available for this work.They would also analyse the present risk assessment programme which, as we have already seen at Elsenham, Bishop’s Stortford, Hucknall and Hereford, is flawed. Nine months before the double tragedy at Elsenham, a risk assessment found it was a safe crossing and no safety work was necessary. After Olivia Thompson and Charlie Thompson died, it was reclassified as the third most dangerous crossing in the country.That analysis can also examine whether and if so by how much budget considerations influence the current risk assessment policy.At Birmingham Crown Court in April, NR were fined £450,000 over the death of Hereford housewife Jane Harding on a level crossing in 2010. She was allowed to drive onto that crossing when a safety barrier had not been lowered in time due to human error. But the court heard that a year before the accident, NR had rejected installing an automatic locking barrier on costs grounds. Expert witnesses said such a device would have cost £40,000 but NR claimed in court the figure was nearer £300,000.Regardless of the exact cost, it seems clear that budget decisions influenced a safety decision which could have saved Jane Harding’s life.This enquiry should also examine the relationship between the Office of Rail Regulation, (ORR) and NR when it comes to enforcing the current safety regime. It may well be the case that the relationship is undermined by the fact that both bodies report to the same political masters at the Department for Transport and the conflict inherent in the ORRs role as safety and economic regulator.The Harding case was unusual in that it was the Crown Prosecution Service that took action in the courts against NR for its failings in Hereford that led to the death of Jane Harding. Normally that would have been the role of ORR. But given that the ORR had effectively endorsed NR’s decision not to install automatic locking gates on the crossing where Jane Harding died, the case was handed over to the CPS. The ORR as a regulator has to set the safety rules for NR and then prosecute it if it fails to follow them, a difficult balancing act at the best of times. It is not only judge and jury, it can act as a prosecutor and sometimes in NR’s defence, as it did at Hucknall when it rejected for a year calls by Peter Rayner and Roy Bell to improve safety at a crossing where two people had already died.Clearly this balancing act did not work in Hereford in 2010. Some would argue it has not worked at Bishop’s Stortford in 2010 where, despite NR’s failings over losing a report which, if implemented would have saved Katie Littlewood’s life, the ORR has decided to take no further legal action against Network Rail.The same argument could perhaps be made about Hucknall where ORR  rejected Peter Rayner’s advice that the crossing was uniquely dangerous and that another tragedy would happen unless action was taken. Sadly, as we all know, Mr Rayner was proved all too correct.We do not want to see any more tragic cases like Olivia Bazlinton, Charlotte Thompson, Jean and Mikey Hoggart, Lindsey Inger, Katie Littlewood and Jane Harding if we can possibly avoid it. This is why we welcome this enquiry and would urge you to act on our recommendations.Too many people have died and too many families have suffered on our dangerous level crossings.Road, pedestrian and rail clearly do not mix without risk but it is our duty to make the systems in place where they do as safe as possible.September 2013&#xa0;