&#xa0;

[[[South Somerset Bridleways Association – Written evidence]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]1.                The South Somerset Bridleways Association was formed over 25 years ago and represents horse riders in South Somerset, which is an area of approximately 370 square miles and covers 120 parishes.  It is affiliated to the British Horse Society.&#xa0;2.                South Somerset Bridleways Association is grateful for all the work and negotiations carried out within the Stakeholder Working Group.  We welcome the Stepping Forward Report and the resulting new legislation.  We fully support the package of measures aimed at reducing and streamlining the work involved in processing DMMO applications and completing the Definitive Map and Statement.&#xa0;3.              We applaud the sensible moves such as using the websites and internet rather than advertising in newspapers, and rejecting spurious applications at an early stage.&#xa0;4              We welcome the proposal, Schedule 6 paragraph 6(3) sub paragraph (4) (b) for the surveying authority to contact landowners. We have found the onus of making the initial contact with landowners has, at times, been contentious and unpleasant. Moving this responsibility to the surveying authority, who are almost by definition in the middle ground, makes a great deal of sense. Coupled with ability to negotiate suitable diversions at the early stage, this should aid in agreeing a route suitable to all parties.  We are only too well aware that where the historic route is through a busy confined area, very close to a private residence, or through a working farmyard, a DMMO application will cause anxiety to a landowner and can sometimes be considered unreasonable. Being able to discuss a suitable diversion at the initial stage should be helpful to all parties, and this welcome change should reduce the number of objections and cost to landowners of diversions. If correctly managed, the resulting route should be agreed at a local level and with a better understanding between the parties than a decision from the Magistrate’s Court.&#xa0;5              The percentage of “higher rights” in South Somerset is under 10%, (for Somerset as a whole it is 16% and for the country it is 22%), so it is not surprising that there are a great number of under and un-recorded routes needing to be correctly recorded.  Thus, we as an association will continue to submit DMMO applications, and the backlog will grow.  Unless the law is changed, the process simplified, and the resources of the Surveying Authorities increased, there is no incentive for Somerset County Council to process any of our 185 applications for bridleways and restricted byways currently in their “queue”.  &#xa0;6              We do have two serious concerns:Firstly: Schedule 6, paragraph 2 in the draft legislation which removes the “reasonably alleged to subsist” test and so,&#xa0;as the document says, is raising the threshold at which an authority must make an order.  All user groups have difficulty in finding volunteers ready and able to research and prepare DMMO applications; it appears to us that it is not in the spirit of fairness to make the process more onerous and expensive to the user groups.&#xa0;7              Secondly:  whilst we can understand the idea of reducing the burden on the Secretary of State and moving the ability to query the lack of progress in processing applications, the cost of applying to a Magistrate’s Court so many times is far beyond the resources of our association. We are mostly young grandmothers and young families who ride regularly, keep our horses locally, and support the local community and local economy.  We were told, unofficially, that Somerset County Council had no intention of processing our applications for higher rights, and this new legislation offers us no way forward; thus, in this respect, it is not deregulatory.&#xa0;8              Challenging their lack of action in the magistrates court is beyond our resources, and even if we did, the caveat of “ the court will be able to take account of relevant circumstances such as the rate of progress the authority is making with any backlog of applications…”  means that they could be given an long or indefinite extension.  &#xa0;9              There is a very large backlog of DMMO applications in Somerset. In particular, the 185 applications we submitted between May 2008 and August 2010, none of which have yet been processed.  We are told that Somerset County Council hope to process, on average, 8 applications per year, which indicates that unless the process is simplified, some of these applications will not be processed until the 2030’s.&#xa0;10              In addition to the 185 applications submitted by our association, there are, even further behind in the backlog, another 56 applications submitted on behalf of the British Horse Society.  The Somerset County Council will not “score” these, and allocate them a place in their queuing system, for another 2 or three years, and so, unless the system is improved, they will not be processed until around 2040.&#xa0;11              We are also unsure, and decisions may not yet have been taken, on how much, if any, of the proposed changes to the legislation will be retrospective. This is important to us. Will those DMMO applications already in the backlog now have to be taken to the Magistrate’s Court rather than referred to the Secretary of State? If so, this is a huge financial burden being imposed retrospectively on the user groups.&#xa0;12              The good news is that many of the 200 kilometres of routes applied for are in current use by horse riders. It would be a travesty if they were extinguished.  If the DMMO applications in the queue (representing approximately 150 kilometres) were successful, the ratio of bridleways and restricted byways to footpaths would be bought closer to the average for the country.&#xa0;13              In summary, we fully support the Stakeholder Working Group’s proposals, but have serious concerns that two elements,  the removal of the “reasonably alleged to subsist” test,  and the necessity of using the Magistrates courts will add significant work and costs to already stretched volunteer groups.  We do not see how these two items can be considered to be deregulatory. Nor do they appear to contain the ethos of fairness which was a key feature of the Stakeholder Working Group.&#xa0;14              We would welcome the opportunity to give oral evidence to the Joint Committee. &#xa0;16 September 2013&#xa0;