&#xa0;

[[[W]]]

[[[ritten evidence from RMT Union (SLC 022)]]]

[[[Introduction]]]The National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers (RMT) welcome the opportunity to submit our views as part of TRANSCOM’s inquiry into safety at level crossings.The RMT organises 16,000 Network Rail employees including over 4,000 signallers and level crossing keepers directly responsible for the safe flow of traffic and the operation and maintenance of level crossings. We also represent 11,000 railway maintenance workers some of whom are called upon to deal with the tragic aftermath of level crossing accidents. RMT also represent members who work for all the train and freight operating companies, working at all grades from driver to station staff. Many of the staff who work for the train operating companies are also affected by level crossing accidents

[[[Executive Summary]]]&#xa0;1.1 No, they are not. In the last 10 years there have been 93 pedestrian and road vehicle occupant fatalities associated with all level crossings. During this 10 year period the level of fatalities has not reduced significantly.1.2 In comparison during the same period rail passenger fatalities from non level crossing accidents are 72 (27% lower than level crossing accidents). Fatalities for the railway workforce during the same period were 30 (68% lower than level crossing accidents). In the same 10 year period there have been just 5 passenger/workforce fatalities in a train accident (95% lower than level crossing accidents), and for the last six year in succession there were no train accidents resulting in passenger or workforce fatalities. 1.3 RMT believe that a single death is a death too many and the level of fatalities associated with level crossings must be reduced by the rail industry.1.4 After fatalities associated with suicide and trespass on the railway, level crossings represent the highest risk on the GB rail network.1.5 Since 2004 RMT have adopted a policy that calls on the rail industry to develop a programme to eliminate level crossings from high-speed railway lines, replacing them with underpasses or bridges, and for a feasibility study on the rest of the network with the ultimate aim of removing all level crossings from Britain’s rail network.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;2.1 Ultimately the most cost effective solution is permanent closure of all level crossings.3.1 RMT believes that all level crossings should be closed and that Network Rail should be required to deliver a plan to maximise the reduction in level crossings, and consequently accidents, by ring-fencing a substantial portion of its expenditure for that specific purpose. RMT believes that the £67m ring-fenced fund suggested in ORR’s draft determination is inadequate. 3.2 Of course the issue of prioritising expenditure on improving level crossing safety cannot be separated from the wider public debate about the structure of the industry. Independent reports state that costs of the privatised and fragmented rail system amount to £1.2bn a year compared to if the industry was in public ownership.  Even by making some internal structural reforms Network Rail could save considerable amounts. Bringing rail maintenance in house for example saved £400m a year and it is estimated that taking similar steps in respect of rail renewals could save £200m.3.3 Currently ORR and Network Rail have provisions to open new level crossings and allow land development in the vicinity of level crossings. RMT believe that there should be no new level crossings brought into use on the railway network and further believe any development in the geographical vicinity of existing level crossings should be resisted if it can be shown that such development would result in an increase in road traffic over the level crossing. 3.4 For example in a case where an industrial estate has its access over a level crossing and the owners wish to expand the estate then they should be prevented from expansion unless another form of access can be provided which results in the level crossing closure. 3.4 ORR policy is that new level crossings can be allowed in certain circumstances such as if a crossing becomes unsafe or a previously closed crossing is brought back into service. RMT believe this policy is wrong.4.1 Having concluded that level crossings carry the highest risk on the railway Network Rail have undertaken a considerable amount of work to improve safety both through its own activity and working with other stakeholders. However, RMT are concerned that too much of the effort is being invested in new technology solutions while at the same time moving away from the use of human intervention. 4.2 While new technology does have a role to play, there are simpler cost effective human controls that can be utilised. RMT have recently raised concerns over Obstacle Detection Level Crossings with Network Rail in relation to testing of this equipment on the Crewe Shrewsbury line. While the company have gone some way to reassure us we still remain concerned that this new technology is not yet fit for purpose.4.3 Due to RMT’s concerns on the Crewe Shrewsbury line MP’s signed EDM 1169: “That this House notes that the implementation of the Crewe to Shrewsbury modular signalling scheme has been beset with problems causing its delay; is deeply concerned that barriers on the currently manned level crossings have not been fitted with the correct detectors, which means that if they were to be operated remotely they would not detect a car underneath; further notes that this has forced manual signal boxes to be retained; is concerned that this may only be a short-term measure; and calls on the Government to ask Network Rail to carry out a review as to the viability of continuing with the scheme.”4.4 RMT representatives in the location submitted a series of concerns over the numbers and types of detectors, delays in signals reverting to red, delays in handling of telephone calls in relation to level crossing and equipment being contaminated by dirt and oil and becoming in-operative. While the company have gone some way to reassure RMT we still remain concerned that this new technology is not yet fit for purpose and further delays to the programme are to be expected.4.5 Additionally with the move away from local control of level crossings to Regional Operating Centres RMT believe that the loss of local knowledge and control will result in more accidents and fatalities. The numbers of signalers and level crossing keepers will be reduced by about 2,400 over the next ten years.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;5.1 No, it is not. The ORR is the economic as well as the safety regulator and so is conflicted from being a genuine, independent safety regulator.5.2 It is the Government, through the ORR that controls the ‘purse strings’ of the rail industry. They therefore bear the responsibility for level crossing accidents if they restrict funding on expenditure. The ORR have already imposed efficiency savings of 50% in the last 10 years so the amount of money available for work to improve safety at level crossings is reduced. Following the McNulty Rail Value for Money Study, calls to establish integrated control centres for signalling, could potentially create greater dangers at level crossings. 5.3 Reduction in the money available to the rail industry through its cuts programme threatens improvements that have been made on level crossings in recent years.5.4 Consideration should be given to establishing a national level crossing review group to develop a national plan on level crossing safety (see para 7.2).6.1 The current law on level crossings is complex, outdated and difficult to access, creating problems for regulators, owners and operators and increasing the safety risk for users. Much of the existing law was developed in the 19th Century and is not fit for purpose. &#xa0;6.2 RMT are concerned that the Law Commission Review of Level Crossing Legislation has not yet been published. When it is published there will need to be appropriate stakeholder consideration on its findings. However careful consideration will need to be given to any recommendation that makes the current legislative minefield easier to negotiate.&#xa0;6.3 RMT believes that there are approximately 2,000 level crossings (excluding city centre crossings) that are within 200m of an alternative means of crossing the infrastructure. There should be a legislative method of making large scale level crossing closures to remove these level crossings as soon as possible. This may require additional spending to make the alternative crossing safe for all users e.g. upgrading footpaths and access routes to meet the requirements of displacement from the level crossing.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;7.1 Network Rail does not work in isolation and though responsible for the safe operation of level crossings other bodies have a role to play. RMT do not believe that the current Road-Rail Interface Safety Group’s membership is wide enough.7.2 RMT believe that  the Government and ORR should assist Network Rail and the rail industry in working with the very broadest range of stakeholders including the trade unions, DfT, Local Authorities, the insurance industry, charities, driving schools, education authorities, and the like to raise public awareness.7.3 The HSE publish ‘Driving at work – Managing work related road safety. (INDG383) this includes a mention of planning journeys for hazards including level crossings. RMT believe that ORR should publish guidance for all level crossing users and a publicity campaign should be launched to support this which addresses level crossing risks to enable road transport operators to develop an improved safety approach to level crossing risks.September 2013&#xa0;&#xa0; RSSB – Annual Safety Performance Report 2012/13 RSSB – Annual Safety Performance Report 2012/13 RSSB – Annual Safety Performance Report 2012/13 RSSB – Annual Safety Performance Report 2012/13 Rebuilding Rail, Report by Transport  for Quality of Life, June 2012 McNulty Rail Value for Money Study, May 2012 Rebuilding Rail, Report by Transport  Quality for Life, June 2012