&#xa0;

[[[June Smith – Written evidence ]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]Joint Committee on the Draft Deregulation Bill, 2013&#xa0;I understand that the above draft Bill will shortly be scrutinised by Parliamentary  Committee. With your help, it may eventually become an Act which will not only save the taxpayer money but also lead to an improved environment for the great numbers of people who seek peaceful recreation in the countryside - many with young children who are learning to treasure it too.&#xa0;As pressure grows on green belts, and spaqes in the urban environment are taken over for much-needed housing and all that goes with it, so the countryside will be needed more and more by families seeking to relax, wind down and get away for a time from the pressures of urban life.  This Bill presents a rare opportunity for the Committee to consider measures which would protect an important part of that countryside for them once and for all.  The old green ways, lanes  and tracks which criss-cross the country are under sustained attack from motorised recreational vehicles, which have reduced many to permanent quagmires, full of ruts, craters, fumes and noise.&#xa0;This degradation continues even on lanes which have supposedly been protected by Traffic Regulation Orders.  One of the many cases in point is the Occupation Road, an unsealed track high above Dentdale.  This was granted a TRO a few years ago, and the Yorkshire Dales National Park, at great public expense, used helicopters to bring in the quantities of stone needed to repair the extensive damage caused by off-road recreational traffic.  Signs were erected, banning the use of these vehicles, but within weeks they had been tom down and driven over, and within months the track was as degraded as before by off-roaders claiming they could use the track because there were no notices.  Clearly, maintenance on this scale is unsustainable, but, without constant monitoring, the present situation offers little hope that the green lanes will survive for future generations to enjoy in peace and tranquillity.&#xa0;A further point of concern is that if a local authority arbitrarily declines to make a TRO, no matter how well supported this may be by the public, there is at present no right of appeal against this decision, either to a magistrate or to an independent inspector.  So the track falls prey to the off-roaders'  onslaught.&#xa0;The Deregulation Bill could afford a lifeline.  It contains a Rights of Way section, which might be used to include measures to define these rights more simply.  Public green ways, lanes and tracks throughout the country are 'unsealed', i.e. they are not covered by tarmac or concrete.  Many are classified as Byways Open to All Traffic (BOATs) or Unclassified County Roads (UCRs). The Bill could protect these at a stroke, putting all such unsealed lanes and tracks out of bounds for motorised recreational vehicles (while protecting rights of access for landowners and householders)  by re-classifying them all as Restricted By-Ways and thereby removing any ambiguity about their status in law.  Notices might still be posted, but their absence could no longer be used as an excuse to destroy these beautiful old tracks and lanes in "ignorance".&#xa0;I know that a number of action groups, including the Green Lanes Environmental Action Group (GLEAM), the Green Lanes Protection Group (GLPG), the Peak District Green Lanes Alliance (PDGLA) and the Yorkshire Dales Green Lanes Alliance (YDGLA) , are making formal submissions on these issues.  I should like to add my support to their presentations and hope that these measures will be included in the Bill.&#xa0;June SmithSeptember 2013&#xa0;