EIS 15

[[[Written evidence submitted by Cleveland Potash Ltd]]]Cleveland Potash Ltd (CPL) owns and operates a potash mine (Boulby Mine) on the north east coast of Yorkshire.  The company nominally mine 3 mtpa potash ore (sylvite &amp; sylvinite) and refine this into 1mtpa potash (MOP = 95% KCl (60% K2O)) mainly used in the fertiliser industry. Although CPL produce enough potash to satisfy the UK demand, the company only supplies about half this market with the remainder being imported from Germany, Russia and Canada. Consequently CPL export large tonnages of potash to some European customers as well as competing for sales worldwide.  In order to access the potash ore deposit, permanent roadways are mined in underlying salt (Halite (95% NaCl)) producing about 800 ktpa of co-product that is mostly sold to local authorities and highway authorities as de-icing salt. In recent years a new access roadway has been driven into the underlying polyhalite seam and CPL is the only mine in the world producing this mineral that has a value as a fertiliser mineral. CPL contributes £225M per year economic activity as measured by product sales and much more by other economic measures.  Much of the vendor spend is local, supporting many small suppliers and service companies.  Half the company’s sales are overseas with approximate foreign earnings of £100M+ per year.Although CPL employ approximately 900 persons in high quality jobs, a further 150 full time contractor employees work at the mine, totalling over 1,050 persons. All direct employees are employed at our Boulby Mine and the nearby export terminal on the river Tees. A socio-economic study of CPL’s impact suggested and confirmed that the mine supports approximately 4,000 up-stream and down-stream jobs with a predominantly regional impact.  At any one time, the equivalent of three full time employees are travelling the world for meetings with parent company, suppliers, customers, trade bodies, conferences and other representations. CPL note that the decline of the UK extractive industry means that the UK is no longer a centre for extractive industries.  The decline of mining and quarrying activities has had a knock-on effect with a decline in UK suppliers of essential products such as mining machinery and day to day equipment that increasingly have to be sourced outside the UK and even outside Europe. Not at all. Increasingly the expertise for extractive industry in the UK has been retired or made redundant or unemployed so that it has become difficult, if not impossible, to recruit suitably qualified personnel from this country. Those mining companies that have working mines in the UK have almost all been taken over by foreign owned companies that are quoted on markets other than London.  The UK has reputational risk because of the cost driven quality of their environmental impact assessments for their operations.  The knowledge base of the financial institutions needs to be much greater so they can understand the complex technical and environmental issues rather than a naïve superficial knowledge. CPL has many interactions with the NGO sector take great pride in the high level of local and regional knowledge and understanding of the mine’s operations as well as the very low level of objections to new or renewed licence applications. Although not the NGO sector, CPL at its Boulby Mine is hosting an increasingly internationally significant range of research activities that utilises the ultra-low radiation background to be found in the mine as well as its great depth (1,100m) which attenuates solar radiation by a factor 106.  CPL have hosted the STFC funded UK Dark Matter search since 1985 but recently the range of activities  have been expanded under the STFC Futures Programme to include:- This is in addition to the company’s own long term joint research project with Durham University investigating mining subsidence and coastal erosion and the range of natural and anthropomorphic influences upon this important natural phenomenon.  Cost effective methods of wide area monitoring have been investigated and models constructed of the mechanisms for cliff recession that have worldwide implications. Recent additional interest in this unique research space has the potential to widen the scope of research even further with implications for UK plc Intellectual Property and that may bring additional benefits for underground operations worldwide.No – the skills base for the extractive industry worldwide is diminishing with the UK seemingly setting the lead in that decline. CPL are finding it increasingly difficult to recruit suitably qualified persons in the UK and increasingly applicants for management positions are from mining areas in other parts of the world with Commonwealth and European countries predominating.  Technical positions are increasingly attracting applicants from those mining areas of Europe that are contracting through re-structuring.  Although most of the mining staff are “home grown” with over 400 staff with 25 year long-service awards and several with 40 year service awards, the company recently recruited several miners from a UK coal mine that was closing, in advance of the need for such staff.  This allows the opportunity to re-train them in potash mining techniques in time for local needs.  It is increasingly difficult to recruit “green miners” locally and regionally. CPL has no objections or comments regarding shale gas operations but would like to draw the Select Committee’s attention to the possibility that shale gas operations have the potential to compromise working mines. This may happen by injudicious opening of faults and fractures that could possibly act as conduits for gas or liquids to enter mine workings that hitherto were immune from such activity.  There is a strong case that shale gas and fracking operations should not take place within 10km of working mines (although this distance could be reduced if better knowledge about the shale gas operation and its impact on the existing mine workings was available).EITI has absolutely no impact on CPL’s operations that exceed all the EITI criteria but from the position as a player in the global mining industry, the UK signing up to EITI is welcome. Some London listed companies are exemplars of environmentally acceptable mining operations around the world, others are less so.Extractive industry outputs are increasingly becoming international commodities and indigenous industries are being bought up by foreign companies seeking global market positions.  Increasingly foreign ownership spells uncertainty for the UK operations that can be reduced by more government support to this sector.&#xa0;David Pybus, External Affairs Manager.&#xa0;&#xa0; http://www.iclfertilizers.com/Fertilizers/ClevelandPotash/Pages/BUHomepage.aspx  http://www.polysulphate.com/index.php 