EIS 22

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[Oil &amp; Gas UK]]]

[[[Introduction]]]Oil &amp; Gas UK is the principal trade association for the offshore oil and gas exploration and production industry in the United Kingdom, with more than 370 member companies, comprising oil and gas operators and investors and a broad spectrum of the supply chain: contractors, suppliers, law firms and consultants.  We welcome the opportunity to respond to this Business, Innovation and Skills Committee’s inquiry into the Extractive Industries Sector.As a trade association for the UK’s offshore oil and gas industry, our answers will be in this context and will not include information on the UK extractive industry more widely. Further, we have only answered the questions which we are in a position to provide information.The UK’s offshore oil and gas industry paid c£6.5bn in production taxes in 2012-2013, and UK Continental Shelf (UKCS) production supports the UK’s Balance of Trade by c£32bn per year. In addition to this, the wider oil and gas supply chain is estimated to have paid a further £5bn in corporation and payroll tax. Capital investment in new fields in 2013 alone will rise to a record £13.5bn. Total capital investment committed to projects already in production or under development totalled £44bn at the start of 2013, £13bn higher than 12 months earlier.Indeed, whilst subdued production and record investment have driven tax revenues down in the short-term, the contribution from oil and gas production was still over 15 per cent of the Exchequer’s total receipts of corporation tax.The UK oil and gas industry supports some 450,000 jobs, many of which are highly skilled, across the whole economy. Of these, 36,000 are employed by operating companies (12,500 of whom work offshore); 200,000 are employed in the supply chain (45,000 of whom work offshore); 112,000 in jobs induced by the economic activity of the above employees, and; 100,000 in the export of goods and services.As mentioned above, related exports from the UK’s oil and gas industry support some 100,000 jobs, with £7bn of the supply chain’s £27bn contribution to the UK economy being made up of exports. The UK’s subsea engineering sector is a world leader, capturing 45 per cent of the global market.The recent Scottish Council for Development and Industry’s 2011-12 Survey of International Activity in Scotland’s Oil and Gas Sector estimated that Scotland’s supply chain totalled £17.2bn in 2011, growing by 5.8 per cent from 2010. International sales increased by 8.4 per cent to £8.2 billion in 2011, with North America remaining the main export market. Scottish exports to Norway, Angola, Nigeria and the UAE are also strong.The export of subsea goods and services from the UK is valued at £4.4 bn. Key markets are Norway, West Africa, North America and Asia. Engineering and manufacturing companies generate a substantial share of this revenue, as do service providers in disciplines such as diving, remotely operated vehicle inspection, underwater construction, installation and surveying.The relationship between where a company is listed and their global footprint can be a complex one. However, it is our view that the UK’s competitive position is strengthened by our members who are listed in the UK and who also have overseas business interest.Companies that fall into this category have an improved ability to source expertise and technology from the international market and bring it back to the UK, which allows access to the best available practices and processes. Further, the UK supply chain that is utilised by these companies can, in turn, get access to international markets that they may otherwise struggle to exploit. This, in turn, has a direct benefit on the UK’s competitive position in the international oil and gas sector.In addition to very high levels of activity on the UKCS, the UK oil and gas industry is competing globally for people with the skills and expertise required to deliver the planned developments abroad. Adding to these pressures, companies from Australia, Canada and the Middle East, for example, recruit from the UK regularly, and multinational companies will deploy their UK personnel overseas to open up developments in new areas, reflecting how highly valued North Sea expertise is.This global shortage is most acute at mid-career engineer level, with virtually all disciplines affected, and is making it increasingly difficult to deliver offshore projects on time and within budget. Further, the shortage of skilled personnel is resulting in a wage spiral which is increasing lifting costs in what is already a relatively expensive basin.The industry recognises it is essential to grow the size of its talent pool and, in addition to well established graduate and apprenticeship schemes, is looking at ways of bringing in mature hires from other sectors, in particular from the military services.  However, this also requires time for transitional training and development of competence.With increased competition for these resources resulting from the development of the onshore oil and gas industry, there is a very real chance that this could have a detrimental impact on the UK’s ability to full exploit future opportunities such as shale gas.Oil &amp; Gas UK, on behalf of the UK’s offshore oil and gas industry, fully supports the principles of transparency and openness on which EITI was established. The oil and gas industry paid £6.5bn of direct production taxes to the UK Exchequer in 2012/13 on top of the wider economic benefits that the UK gains from domestic oil and gas production. Oil &amp; Gas UK feel that there are significant benefits to be gained from civil society having a greater awareness of the contribution our industry makes.EITI was designed for resource rich countries that have significant governance issues surrounding the use of funds arising from their mineral wealth. It is worth noting that these concerns are absent in the UK context, and a significant amount of data is already collected by Government agencies and published online to provide transparency about the total amount of direct tax revenues that the oil and gas industry pays each year. Given this, Oil &amp; Gas UK fully supports the use of existing data returns to minimise the admin burden that any additional requirements that EITI could bring.The UK’s adoption of EITI is still in its infancy, with the first meeting of the Multi Stakeholder Group (MSG) planned for October 2013. Until more is known about how the EITI will be implemented in the UK it is difficult for Oil &amp; Gas UK, or its member companies to offer much insight about what impact the initiative may have in the future. We do offer some general opinions and wishes which we hope will be borne in mind by the MSG and the Committee:1)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The compliance burden placed on industry by EITI must be minimised as far as possible. Additional data being required or expected from companies must be proportionate to the benefits the additional insights give ‘civil society’ groups. 2)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Companies of all sizes should be able to manage the demands placed upon them by the EITI process without materially affecting their UK based business. Otherwise EITI will become a factor in reducing the competitiveness of extracting oil and gas from the UK and its territorial waters.3)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Information requested under EITI, and published publicly, should be at the appropriate reporting level, and must not compromise commercial positions of the reporting companies or risk being anti-competitive in nature.Some UK-listed companies have considerable experience of implementing EITI in other countries and have found it a beneficial process in terms of transparency it brings to the industry in individual countries and the engagement it engenders between stakeholders on key questions affecting the extractive sector.If the UK joining EITI encourages wider adoption of EITI principles, leading to improved governance and reduced levels of corruption internationally there could be a benefit to those UK-listed companies who operate in the countries concerned. This would depend on the regulation. If the additional regulation was designed to encourage investment, incentivise innovation or was a consolidation of existing regulations in an attempt to make compliance more efficient, then these could potentially have the impact of making the UK a more competitive and, therefore, attractive place to do business.However, it should be understood that the oil and gas industry is truly international and when companies are looking to invest the regulatory environment is one of the key considerations. We oppose regulation for regulation’s sake and do not believe that the amount of regulation should be a consideration but, rather, focus should be on the creation of proportionate, evidenced based and applicable regulation.The UK oil and gas industry will remain of significant economic importance for many decades. With the development of subsea engineering and decommissioning, the UK is particularly well placed to continue to export these expertise – with the UK economy more widely enjoying all the associated benefits.

[[[Conclusion]]]We trust that this submission is helpful to the Committee’s inquiry.  If there are any queries relating to our submission, please do not hesitate to contact us.23 September 2013&#xa0;