

[[[EIS 26]]]

[[[Written evidence submitted by World Vision (WV)]]]World Vision (WV) is the world’s largest overseas children’s charity. As a Christian relief, advocacy and development agency World Vision works in some of the world’s poorest communities and in the most fragile contexts, where we work with children, families and communities to overcome poverty and injustice. World Vision welcomes the opportunity to submit evidence to the Select Committee for Business, Innovation and Skills Inquiry into the UK extractive industries. This submission is based on evidence from our overseas projects and programmes, which work with thousands of children who have experienced the worst forms of child labour working in dangerous conditions in the extractive industries. We limit our comments to this inquiry to the two questions which deal specifically with the corporate governance of UK extractive industries. Most of the world’s biggest mining companies are listed on the London Stock Exchange. Outside of the USA, the London Stock Exchange has the largest share of companies in the extractive industries, representing 13% of the global market cap. UK companies produce two thirds of the world’s iron ore output and the majority of the world’s diamond, platinum and titanium production. The scale of the UK’s extractive industry market share means that UK companies and the UK government have a responsibility to lead the world in terms of responsible corporate governance within these industries. There are clear reputational risks for the UK when UK companies fail to meet their corporate governance responsibilities. In 2011 an oil spill from a Shell tanker caused extensive environmental damage on the Texas coastline. Shell faced strong criticism from the public and from the Obama Administration about its response to the crisis; almost all media reports into the oil spill referred to Shell specifically as UK Company, and the country was implicated in the oil spill crises by association. The extractive industries are responsible for the some of the worst abuses to children’s human rights. Globally, one million children work in small scale mining or quarrying. The International Initiative to End Child Labour (ILEC) reports that in June 2013 at least 10 children died having been crushed by collapsing rock or asphyxiated while working illegally on a gold mine in Kamituga, in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo.  World Vision’s own research, based on interviews with 53 children working in artisanal mining in the Kambove region of the DRC found that 19 per cent of children said they had seen a child die on an artisanal mining site, 67 per cent of the children experienced frequent or persistent coughing and several girls reported experiencing genital infections after working waist-deep in acidic water.  Child mining is categorised as one of the worst forms of child labour because of the risks of harm to children’s physical and psychological health. There are direct health risks to child working on the mines and all children living in communities near mines face a range of environmental health hazards including the risk of water and soil contamination by toxic mercury or other chemicals. There is a strong association between children working in mines and the risk of alcohol abuse, substance misuse and sexual exploitation. World Vision has found that sex industries can develop around mining sites which involve children, and research by Human Rights Watch found examples of girls who were trafficked from Nigeria to Mali to work in the sex industry around the gold mines.  Extractive industries are heavily concentrated in fragile contexts in countries which face severe development challenges including weak institutional capacity, poor governance, political instability and the effects of conflict. These states also have weak child protection systems and limited social protection mechanisms which can help to prevent child abuse. The reality of corruption and under-investment means that some resource-rich fragile countries lack the capacity, and or, the political will that is necessary to properly hold corporate entities operating within their territories to account for the impact of their business activities.   This further demonstrates the need for UK corporations and the UK governmental to meets its international responsibilities to uphold human rights as set out in various international human rights instruments including the Human Rights Act 1998, UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) and the Committee to the UNCRC’s general comment on business and human rights as well as the OECD guide lines to multinationals and the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. World Vision has worked with children and communities that are involved with artisanal mining across Southern Africa and in Asia for decades. We have found that children’s involvement in mining can take two forms; firstly some children work individually or with their families in small scale unregulated artisanal mining sites where they use basic techniques to dig for and extract precious metals. These metals are then sold through a series of middle men and some of these metals will end up with the big gold or diamond trading houses where they are either sold domestically or exported.  Some children combine mining with attending school, or use the income from mining towards school costs, but many others work for up to 15 hours a day, and do not earn enough for an evening meal at the end of the working day. Secondly, children also work illegally on larger and more regulated mining sites which are owned by big mining companies. In these cases child labour is ignored or children work on the mines without being registered or using false identification. 

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[World Vision recommendations on corporate governance and corporate responsibility ]]]One example the UK may choose to follow is the growing US political awareness and willingness to use legislation to confront and combat child labour and trafficking. The Business Transparency on Trafficking and Slavery Act (H.R. 2759) is a US-wide bill introduced on 1 August 2011. It is modelled after  a California act and requires all publicly-traded or private company currently required to submit annual reports to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to ‘disclose efforts to identify and address the risks of human trafficking, forced labour, slavery, and the worst forms of child labour in their supply chains.’ The bill would apply to all companies with an annual worldwide gross receipt exceeding one hundred million dollarsLegislation in the UK could place, for example, the following requirements on British corporations or those listed on the London Stock Exchange (FTSE): World Vision welcomes the commitment from Home Secretary Theresa May to introduce a Modern Slavery Bill in the next parliamentary session and also the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills review of Corporate Responsibility. We consider both of these new initiatives are important vehicles to introduce a stronger legislative approach to respond to the worst forms of child labour in the extractive. &#xa0;

[[[Sector-specific responses to the child labour in extractive industries]]]World Vision welcomes the UK government’s leadership in the establishment of the Extractive Industry Trading Initiative (EITI). We consider the initiative has the potential to provide much needed improvement in transparency about the amount of money extractive industry companies pay to governments, therefore promoting political accountability in these countries. The EITI does not address human rights issues directly, and a sector-wide framework is needed to improve transparency about corporations’ human rights and environmental impact which includes attention to children’s rights.  In 2005 the ILO launched the ‘Minors out of Mining’ programme, a tripartite programme between the International Council on Mining and Metals, trade unions and the ILO. The programme recognised that mining is one of the worst forms of child labour and it sought to eliminate child mining by 2015. The programme however has not progressed beyond its initial announcements or achieved any tangible benefits for child minors. ILO/IPEC has insisted that they could not get the cooperation and leadership needed from the unions and the industry in order to make the programme work. The global community will not eliminate the worst forms of child labour by 2020 without effective large-scale programmes which address the needs of children working in the extractive industries. &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Vorhees (D)(2011), Extractive Sector Companies Listed on Global Stock Exchanges, Revenue Watch Institute:  London Mining Network (2012), UK Mining Companies &amp; the Case for Stricter Oversight: London  ILO (2005), A Load too Heavy to Carry: children in mining and quarrying, ILO: London  International Initiative to End Child Labour, (June 2003) Kids are dying in Congolese Gold Mines and No one is held accountable, Accessed (20/09/2013): http://endchildlabor.org/?p=9976 World Vision (2013) Child Miners Speak Key findings from Children and Artisanal Mining in the Kambove Region of the DRC.  ILO () A Load too Heavy; children in mining and quarrying, 