&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Mr Philip Rule (LAI 0008)]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;Dear Mr Grayling,&#xa0;

[[[Re: Consultation paper]]]

[[[ CP14/2013]]]

[[[: ]]]

[[[Transforming legal aid: delivering a more credible and efficient system]]]&#xa0;I wish to respond to the consultation paper in light of the grave fears I have that certain proposals will lead to a system that is unworkable and leaves the vulnerable unable to obtain or enforce adequate legal protections of basic and fundamental rights including the right to liberty.&#xa0;I am driven to draft my own reply and not simply to endorse those of others or professional bodies given my firm belief the present proposals will remove two fundamental principles of the rule of law from a system seeking to do fairness. These are:(1)&#xa0;&#xa0; The principle that justice (being the fair and correct outcome – not just the process in some more general way) should be available to all and not depend on the financial resources of the individual. In many areas under the proposed system the ability to pay will be the only means by which to ensure a proper standard of quality of legal representation;(2)&#xa0;&#xa0; The principle that lawyers should not have an incentive in the outcome of a case directly contrary to the interests of the lay client. The express aim of the proposals is to encourage lawyers to make final decisions at earlier stages when less evidence is available to consider properly potential defences or alternative offences which should dispose of the case. More worrying though is the express desire to have accused people plead guilty by ensuring lawyers are penalised should a client wish to proceed to a trial and should the client persist in his innocence contrary to the lawyer’s interests.  &#xa0;Proposals which will do away with these two fundamental principles of justice for all, and lawyers acting in the best interests of their client (as will inevitably be eroded by the proposed large-firm, ‘no change of lawyers’, competitive fee-focused system) will create a two-tier justice system which will in time become as derided and mistrusted by a large portion of the public as that of our American colleagues (as I have witnessed first-hand).&#xa0;I confirm I have “the overall fiscal context firmly in mind” in my response [p5]. I also have in mind the need for fair remuneration to be provided to lawyers representing the disadvantaged and vulnerable who cannot afford to pay for access to justice themselves, and who require access to the courts as a protection from mistreatment by those placed in positions of power over them and charged with important responsibilities to perform fairly and dutifully. The role of the courts in supervising those responsibilities is vital and a noble tradition of our country. It underpins freedom and justice for all. &#xa0;I have serious concerns over many aspects of the consultation paper, and have seen and concur with the concerns set out by my professional bodies on behalf of the public interest. My own reply will only focus on some of the issues where I feel I can add relevant considerations, but that is not to be taken as any indication I am only concerned by these specific issues.&#xa0;

[[[Criminal law]]]Q17. Do you agree with the proposal under the competition model that clients would generally have no choice in the representative allocated to them at the outset?&#xa0;Q20. Do you agree with the proposal under the competition model that clients would be required to stay with their allocated provider for the duration of the case, subject to exceptional circumstances?&#xa0;Q8. Do you agree that, given the need to deliver further savings, a 17.5% reduction in the rates payable for those classes of work not determined by the price competition is reasonable?&#xa0;Q26. Do you agree with the proposals to amend the Advocates’ Graduated Fee Scheme to: -introduce a single harmonised basic fee, payable in all cases (other than those that attract a fixed fee), based on the current basic fee for a cracked trial; -reduce the initial daily attendance fee for trials by between approximately 20 and 30%;- and taper rates so that a decreased fee would be payable for every additional day of trial?&#xa0;I do not agree with the above proposals, although I accept the premise that some savings to expenditure may be deemed inevitable and unavoidable. &#xa0;One of the most concerning aspects of the proposal in criminal legal aid is to ensure that there is no justification for continuing a tradition of seeking to offer a quality of service to the client. The fee under the present systems provides the same fee to the lawyer who has done a very good job, avoiding any feeling of injustice, and inefficient use of court time or improperly long examinations of witnesses, and avoiding appeal grounds for failures to investigate issues or inadequate advocacy, as it does to the inadequate one. The only incentives remaining for the lawyer to do the job well are the prospect that clients will choose a lawyer with a good reputation or return to one with a proven record of providing a good level of service. To remove that leaves only the conscience of the lawyer. It is unclear whether the proposed bidders for contracts on “wholesale” justice will regard conscience as a matter that can be entered into the financial accounts at year-end. There is no justification at all for removing choice at the outset of the proceedings; and grave danger to restricting the ability of a criminally-accused who has come to realise his solicitor’s firm (technically I suppose, his provider) is not simply not doing the job that needs to be done. Removal of client choice is a removal of the last factor that encourages from a business-perspective the effort being placed into the service provided to seek to ensure a just result for the client.&#xa0;I have not previously felt it necessary to respond to consultations concerning cuts to fees, which while painful for many individual practitioners were not previously in a single move of such potential as to destroy the system of justice in which I work. Nonetheless undoubtedly in twelve years of practice I have already seen a decline in standards following the changes to the structures of payment and to the levels of fees for publicly-funded work and in particular in crime. I have seen inadequate service to criminally-accused as well as to victims of crime. This has frequently been seen in the case of representatives who have not been tested or proven in a quality-competitive field, but whose instructions were secured on the basis of financial incentive to the instructing solicitor or lawyer because it has been possible for larger firms, in particular, to employ advocates who do not therefore obtain their cases through consistent high standards of performance and diligence but through being of the greatest financial value to the employer. Such a system does not save the taxpayer money in the long term given the appeals that result, and often not even in the immediate short-term cost either when substandard service attracts the same fee as a good quality of service. &#xa0;I note however that the paper states “We recognise that given the reductions in the scope of civil legal aid through the recent implementation of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (LASPO), together with the 10% fee reduction in all civil and family legal aid fees which were made in 2010 and 2011, there is limited room for making further substantial cost reductions in this area” (6.2). It is not clear why the consistent reductions made over the past few years to the payments under the criminal AGFS do not present the same issue in criminal legal aid and indicate as much as could be removed from the system without removing a credible standard of advocacy service has been. Substantial savings have been made over a relatively short space of time in the removal of ex post facto (‘red corner’) payments, the introduction of the Very High Cost Cases system, and the incremental reductions to the AGFS and VHCC systems. Cases that had been capable of subsidising less-well remunerated work are a thing of the past already.&#xa0;I also note the intention to create savings of £220 million per year [2.16]. From the figures in the paper (e.g. table p19) this appears to be a little over 10% of total spend on legal aid. This suggests a disproportionate cut to criminal legal aid as the average case seems to be taking a cut of around 30%, sometimes much more. That follows the many years of reductions in fees which have made some junior advocates abandon publicly-funded work or move to employed positions where work is guaranteed and selection is not made on quality. It is also clear that the experience of ‘in-house’ advocacy systems, such as the Crown Prosecution Service trialed and some larger defence firms tried, is that they result in inefficiency and expense compared to the independent Bar, particularly when cases cannot be “cherry-picked” and consideration is given to sickness benefit, holiday pay, maternity and paternity pay, and pension requirements, as well as inefficient running of trials or lack of willingness to work hours beyond those for which payment is specifically being made.&#xa0;One intention is to have less time spent on each case by practitioners, so producing less time required to be compensated by the fee payable. However insufficient consideration is given to the effects of other budgetary issues or institutional inefficiencies that contribute to ‘wastage’. The penalising of advocates for ineffective hearings should not follow from matters outside the control of the reasonably-competent advocate. For example the advocate is penalised in the case of a “non-report” for sentencing by a probation officer; where an individual is not produced by the prison or custodian services; where a custody van arrives too late or a court is simply too busy so that cases are adjourned for lack of time. These issues should be the focus of the drive for efficiency. Experience in practice shows rarely is a lawyer’s interest in lack of speed or efficiency, quite the reverse.&#xa0;The paper expresses the intention to create an “incentive to try and complete cases as early as possible. We propose to restructure the Crown Court advocacy fee scheme, by paying the same rate whether there is an early or a late guilty plea or a short trial, and by reducing and tapering the daily trial attendance rates in longer trials” (2.9). My first objection to this is clear by reference to one of the fundamental principles I identified above. This is a financial incentive for the advocate, who may have an employer to answer to in the modern era as well as his conscience and professional code, to secure an outcome of the case favoured by the proposers of the scheme. That intent seeks to rely on the potential for a lawyer’s self-interest above or in place of the lay client’s interest, if that intent is to have any meaning. This is simply wrong and not a proper or ethical way for a lawyer, or his funding client, to act. Financial incentives for lawyers have no place in a system of criminal justice. The aim of the system should be only to protect the innocent from wrongful conviction whilst securing justice for victims of crime. Secondly, the proposal is wrong because it works against the lawyer who conscientiously wishes to see the actual evidence and actually read it, before he gives conclusive advice to his client as to whether the appropriate offence has been charged, consideration of lawful defences, and ingredients of the offence. It is a system that rewards the lazy, the self-interested and the unconscientious. To create a system with that aim only serves to demonstrate it is cost, not the just outcome of a case that it is now to be expected to be in the lawyer’s mind, and at the forefront no less.&#xa0;The length of a trial is also not a matter that it should be overestimated is within the control of the advocate for one party. The attendance of witnesses, Judge’s availability during the trial and use by the list office for other work intermittently and intermingled, the attendance of defendants, the need for other counsel in the case to be released to attend the Court of Appeal, the speed of examination by other counsel, the speed or manner of answers by witnesses, the agreement or otherwise to matters of Admission avoiding the need for evidence, etc, are all examples of matters affecting the length of trial not within such control, and sometimes not capable of anticipation when a brief is accepted.&#xa0;I would note that I am in favour of the proposal that given there is (likely) to be an earnings cap on legal aid availability there should be provision made for defence costs orders from central funds (3.36-3.37). I am however not in favour in general terms of the earnings cap, or of the level proposed, given the expense of a long or complicated matter may seem unattainable to some of those removed from eligibility, and so encourage disposals of cases based on financial and not legal consideration, or in worst cases based not on guilt but on the need to limit expenditure and exposure to the costs of trial. &#xa0;I am also not in favour of capping recovery at legal aid rates. It appears the scheme proposed seeks to prevent the establishment of a private-client market driven by private market forces, as in that instance there would be a ready comparable rate of pay for criminal lawyers to compare with legal aid rates. It is difficult to see what other justification there can be for refusing to allow an innocent person who is acquitted of the crime alleged against him to recover “reasonable” rates of expenditure on his fully-justified defence (as used to be the case). The likelihood is that some defendants will be compelled to employ no lawyers or only the very most junior to conduct even complicated cases where they cannot afford to spend money on experienced advocates when there is no prospect of recovering fees that may be reasonable but nonetheless would be in excess of legal aid rates.&#xa0;If cuts are imposed on advocates it would be right that the issue of time of payment be considered, as well as travelling expenses. For many junior barristers (and a growing number of more senior ones also) the costs of travel may outweigh the full gross fee for a case. The local Bar rule is no longer fit for use, and should be replaced by payment of the reasonable travel costs of all advocates attending court so that at least the individual is not actually out-of-pocket for having agreed to go to work (or meet professional obligations to attend in relation to a case transferred to follow a judge to another court). In addition the uncertainty over timing of payment for a case, as to when it may conclude, or the fee be processed by the LAA is a major problem when fees are so low in any event. There ought to be urgent consideration given to reforming the system for payment to ensure a regular and prompt payment for work done. &#xa0;

[[[Prison law]]]Q1. Do you agree with the proposal that criminal legal aid for prison law matters should be restricted to the proposed criteria?&#xa0;The underpinning philosophy of the approach to prison law appears to be that this is a ‘growth’ area and that it ought not to be. It is of course conceivable that with developments of the law in fact prison law amounting for 1% of criminal legal aid spending is well-within the limits that should be expected if justice is to be done to individuals placed in custody. Such population has mental health or other vulnerabilities in disproportion to the general public, as is well-known. &#xa0;However it also appears that no allowance is made in the prediction of growth for the impact of the abolition of the IPP (indeterminate sentence for public protection) on 3rd December 2012. As a practitioner in this field I am aware of the volume of casework that has resulted from the failures of public law duty by the Ministry of Justice in relation to provision for the IPP population. As this population declines it seems very probable indeed that there will be a natural reduction in spending on legal aid in prisons (less parole hearings, less urgent need for rehabilitation courses, etc). I ask that there be review of the statistics said to underpin the need to make such drastic proposed cuts to legal aid availability in prison law to take account of the abolition of the IPP. Without such statistical consideration the perceived need behind the proposals in this area may be being very considerably overstated. It already appears that the most recent year’s figures saw a percentage decrease (3.12 table).&#xa0;Further, to answer the specific question (Q1), I do not believe the proposed criteria for funding legal aid are proper, or potentially lawful indeed. They are simply too restrictive. “Matters related to categorisation, segregation, close supervision centre and dangerous and severe personality disorder referrals and assessments, resettlement issues and planning and licence conditions would not be funded as they do not engage any of the proposed scope criteria” (3.18; and Annex B). However it is wholly unrealistic to suggest internal complaints or Ombudsman systems can adequately address such issues, and wholly disingenuous or to misunderstand the progression of prisoners or the conditions of existence involved in the same to regard such matters as of insufficient importance to require the protections of the rule of law and access to judicial supervision.  &#xa0;The removal of funding from such wide range of cases, including some disciplinary adjudications where the law may or may not be complicated as to the mental or actus reus ingredients of the offence irrespective of the sentence that follows, will inevitably mean that access to a court, through judicial review, will be denied as solicitors or the unqualified representatives sometimes doing this low-paid work will not have considered the case for the potential need to commence a judicial review that a lawyer could identify within the circumstances of the individual’s case. Without the involvement of solicitors there will be almost no potential for the need for judicial review of the decision of a State official to be identified and for judicial review to follow. This is despite the fact some of those areas proposed to be removed from the legal aid scheme involve determination of civil rights in Article 6 ECHR terms or Article 8 ECHR interferences that must be limited to only those necessary and proportionate. The State will not thereby provide an effective remedy (as Art. 13 requires be provided).&#xa0;

[[[Judicial reviews]]]Q5. Do you agree with the proposal that providers should only be paid for work carried out on an application for judicial review, including a request for reconsideration of the application at a hearing, the renewal hearing, or an onward permission appeal to the Court of Appeal, if permission is granted by the Court (but that reasonable disbursements should be payable in any event)?&#xa0;The consultation papers states “We continue to believe it is important to make legal aid available for most judicial review cases, to ensure access to a mechanism which enables persons to challenge decisions made by public authorities which affect them” (3.61). In fact the proposed system will ensure “most” cases are not able to be brought. &#xa0;There is expressed to be an aim that “lawyers who bring weak cases will no longer be reimbursed” [p3]. I take no issue with the aim that only deserving cases should be funded. The present system in fact provides for this aim by requiring the specialist unit at the Legal Aid Agency (as it now is) to approve funding applications by an analysis of the merits of the case. However even if some reform could be made to improve the system, the proposals in the paper are inappropriate and would prevent lawyers from providing the service to deserving cases for the reasons that follow.&#xa0;The first assumption made is that lawyers are bringing cases that are “weak” (thus the need for “a greater incentive for providers to give more careful consideration to the strength of the case before applying for permission for judicial review, through transferring the financial risk of the application to the provider”; 3.62). This assumption must assume that the lawyers when commencing a judicial review claim are in a position to know the case is “weak” (i.e. may not be regarded as arguable by the Court, though it is well-known the Court does not apply a test as to “arguability” that is as generous as that might sound to the uninitiated to the actual practice of the judiciary in determining what cases warrant a full hearing).  &#xa0;Whilst usually a Letter Before Action (“LBA”) has been issued prior to a claim, frequently, with tight deadlines to be met of promptitude and a 3-month final deadline, the position for the lawyer can be:1)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; no reply at all is received to the LBA;2)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; there will in all cases (in practice) be no evidence provided by the proposed Defendant upon which merits can be reassessed at that early stage;3)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; changes of circumstances beyond the lawyer's control after the commencement of proceedings frequently affect the merits, and judicial review is for practical not academic relief. Delay by the Court in dealing with permission may mean time has moved on and matters become academic; it will not be known whether the court may grant urgent consideration or not; unknown whether Defendants seek extra time to provide defence and evidence; or a Defendant may take another decision rendering the claim academic, either as a result of the claim being issued, or as a result of delay in the court consideration so that another decision is taken following policy timetables for reviews or fresh decisions; a claim may be stayed behind other like cases which will address the point of contest and may mean that the claim becomes unarguable only after issuing and after a subsequent decision that precedes the grant of permission to the instant claim, etc; 4)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; there may be no previous judgment establishing the legal principle at the heart of the claim thus no reliable guide to whether the case would be probable to succeed or not.&#xa0;The proposal not to pay lawyers for considerable drafting work, or oral permission hearings, takes no account of the need for “test” cases to be brought in relation to policies, decisions or procedures as to which there is no previous judgment. There is no justification for the lawyer to be liable to penalisation for having begun a case where the law is in a state of evolution. Frequently in such cases a Deputy Judge on paper may refuse permission but an oral hearing for renewal may succeed in demonstrating that the point should in due course be considered. That may be particularly so where the relevant decision is a Strasbourg one which may conflict with earlier domestic authority so necessitating appeal to the higher courts, if after a full hearing.&#xa0;In truth the failure of a judicial review claim to obtain permission may have nothing at all to do with a lawyer making any error in the assessment of merits or prospects at the stage at which the decision must be made whether to accept instructions and issue proceedings. Therefore it cannot be right to penalise the lawyer for bringing a case. &#xa0;In any event it would be possible to identify cases that were truly wholly without merit from the start even on the information then available to the lawyer (though it is likely the LAA would not have granted funding in the first place, and the error would be a shared one). In the absence of a judicial declaration to that effect there is no justification for not compensating the lawyer for the time expended on the claim. &#xa0;The impact of such a rule will be ‘chilling’, and prevent proper judicial reviews being brought because the risk to the lawyer is too great given the unknowns and imponderables described above. The development of the law will be hindered; and individuals left without access to a lawyer competent to advance their case even though they might have succeeded and been entitled to relief.&#xa0;The second incorrect assumption underpinning the proposals is that there is a comparable position with that in the immigration and asylum appeals to the Upper Tribunal (e.g. 3.70; a system which itself recognised the need for some exceptions: n40 at para. 3.70). The comparison is misconceived and erroneous. In such Tribunal cases there has been a hearing already. This is vitally important because:1)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The individual has already had access to an independent tribunal, and had a judicial decision made.2)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; There are specific limitations on the admission of ‘fresh’ evidence in immigration and asylum cases (rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal

[[[) ]]]Rules 2008 (as amended)). Such evidence would usually in any event come from the individual not the UKBA, and accordingly lawyers choosing to appeal will be expected to know the full content of the case.3)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The lawyers have already been recompensed for becoming familiar with the facts, evidence, arguments and counter-arguments.4)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The Upper Tribunal is likely in the vast majority of cases to be concerned with factual not legal issues, the reverse position to most judicial review. &#xa0;Furthermore in such Upper Tribunal cases to-date there has been a recompense in the form that “no-win no-fee” has operated in the private sector. It is of course proposed to remove that uplift, but there is plainly no evidence as to how the scheme will work even in the Upper Tribunal without the uplift of 35% that was payable on all the fees of the appeal if permission was granted.&#xa0;The rationale for the system of payment depending on permission, and the rationale for now removing the uplift is specifically stated to be “based on their detailed knowledge of the case and the specialist understanding of the law in the relevant area... The provider is in the best position to know the strength of their client’s case and the likelihood of it being granted permission. For this reason also, we do not consider that an uplift is required to compensate for working “at risk” on the permission application” (6.29). Conversely in judicial review when the application decision is taken it cannot be “based on their detailed knowledge of the case” given the early stage of the proceedings and the fact the Defendant’s evidence and summary resistance will not have been supplied.&#xa0;Assuming the recording was historically done with some understanding of the important use to which it is now to be put, the statistics record 330 cases ended without permission but with substantial benefit, but 500 did not. It is not acceptable that the 330 cases should not be brought (as is suggested: 3.67, 3.73). In any event the reliability of the statistical analysis to support the contention that 500 cases produced no benefit to the client is open to very substantial question. There is also a question to be answered as to the value of access to justice, and a judicial determination, where otherwise the individual would feel no independent arbitration had occurred to consider his grievances against the approach or decision of the challenged decision-maker.&#xa0;Furthermore it is not just the 330 cases that would not be brought, it is those that actually succeeded but which carried a risk too great for a lawyer to be able to undertake the case. The proportions of permission refusal in cases, 845 of 1799, would obviously mean that lawyers could not afford to approach their cases on the basis of being paid for slightly more than half. That is before one takes account of the reduction in fees by one-half for those other cases (as is proposed also), and takes into account that some paper refusals may not be able to be challenged given the greater risk of yet more time spent on a case that may not be recompensed so not proceeding further although that claim might ultimately have been successful.&#xa0;In effect making the funding structure for meritorious cases, meeting the funding test, dependant on no-win no-fee (a win being the grant of permission) is not a sustainable or fair basis for provision of public law advice, drafting and representation. Judicial review in public law matters is dependent upon many factors for the grant of permission that cannot be known at the start, and have nothing to do with whether the lawyer’s advice was good or not or whether the institution of the case was the proper course to take.&#xa0;Access to a court for a decision to be reviewed is fundamental to a fair system of governance and to the relationship between the State and the individual affected by the actions and decisions of public bodies. Where cases are evenly-balanced on the arguments, a lawyer would not accept a “no-win, no-fee” case even where uplifts exist. The risks would be economically unsustainable. &#xa0;The potential for cases to be considered by the Court of Appeal to grant permission to proceed with judicial review would likely become a theoretical one. The risks to the provider of taking a case to a second level at the risk no reimbursement would be made for any of the work would be far less tolerable than in the case of a Tribunal case where the work below was already recompensed. &#xa0;Lastly on this issue, it is unreasonable and unrealistic to suppose the courts will entertain arguments as to costs only once the public law issue is rendered academic (3.75-3.76). It is also counter-productive to the costs to be incurred by the public authorities as defendants, so it is not sensible to require this. Also as costs are discretionary it is wholly unreasonable to ask providers to incur the risk of still greater costs to go to a contested hearing on that issue alone with no clear entitlement to costs given the breadth of judicial discretion. &#xa0;My answer to Q5 is that I do not agree for the above reasons it is appropriate or workable to remove payment for work done for the permission application when it has been refused (for any of the reasons it might be).&#xa0;Q6. Do you agree with the proposal that legal aid should be removed for all cases assessed as having “borderline” prospects of success?&#xa0;This proposal would represent a further ‘chilling’ effect for the testing of legal disputes where the issue may be of fundamental importance and relate to a new or undetermined decision or policy, but where the resolution of the claim would be a development of the law and so cannot be reliably guided by previous cases to establish a likelihood of success. There is insufficient basis for a need to remove funding from borderline cases irrespective of the public importance of the issues at stake, or the individual’s own interest in the claim (which may be very substantial even if not a case of the limited types excepted from the prospects of success criteria). I do not agree with the proposal.&#xa0;Q31. Do you agree with the proposal that fees for self-employed barristers appearing in civil (non-family) proceedings in the County Court and High Court should be harmonised with those for other advocates appearing in those courts.&#xa0;This proposal does not recognise the use of counsel in specialist work where counsel is cheaper because of the specialist background knowledge allowing less time to be spent on the case, and does not make any reasonable comparison of like situations. For example in judicial review work in the main, and almost universally if not universally in complicated or specialist areas of judicial review work the advocacy and key drafting is done by Counsel. High Court work requires higher rights of audience that the majority of solicitors in civil work do not even possess. The payment structure is not an anomaly, but a representation of the relationship to private rates to the legal aid rates, where if the disparity is too great the best barristers will simply not be prepared to undertake publicly-funded work. That will create a two-tier quality system anathema to a true justice system. &#xa0;The reduction proposed would also reinforce the problems facing judicial review work where barristers would not be able to rely even on current rates of recompense to subsidise cases where permission was not granted. The potential for “enhancement” of fees is particularly inappropriate to judicial review work. It is unlikely to be possible to establish a claim is “exceptional” (Annex I) or was conducted in an “exceptional” manner, where the court will simply normally expect to see barristers appearing and conducting such cases with that same speed, efficiency, skill and expertise, and will expect most judicial review cases to be of complexity, albeit the complexity and skill in a judicial review claim may ordinarily be thought of as being exceptional in the large majority of such cases. &#xa0;In judicial review work at least there is no justification for reducing the fees paid to barristers, as there is no ‘anomaly’ because the type of work that requires judicial review is simply not appropriate to be conducted by a solicitor, as present practice already evidences. It will further be unduly difficult to establish one skilfully-presented judicial review is exceptional compared to other skilfully-presented judicial reviews.&#xa0;I sincerely hope that the Ministry of Justice will revisit the proposals in light of the responses to the consultation, including this one, and alter the proposals before significant damage is done to the legal profession and to the public confidence and faith in the justice system and fairness of British society.&#xa0;23 September 20131&#xa0;