&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from the National Pensioners Convention]]]

[[[ (TIC 108)]]]1. INTRODUCTION1.1 The National Pensioners Convention (NPC) is Britain's largest pensioner organisation representing around 1.5m older people, active in over 1000 affiliated groups. The NPC is run by and for pensioners and campaigns for improvements to their income, health and welfare.1.2 This outline submission by P.G.Rayner FCILT and Vice President of NPC is not detailed as NPC is not resourced for a detailed submission of this complexity.1.3. Whilst recognising the Inquiry is not focused solely on older people it must be recognised that older people make up a substantial user of Rural Transport.2 SPECIFIC QUESTIONS. (Bullet points 1 to 6)2.1. As stated in 1.2 above it is not possible to answer the specifics without considerable research. That research NPC is trying to commission if funds (3k) can be found. The need is to establish the position nationwide because the provision varies location by location with regard to what is loosely described as "Community Transport". In some places this is free, in others a charge is made, albeit to cover costs of volunteer people et al. Nevertheless it means in effect that a disabled or PRM (Person of reduced Mobility) older citizen is disadvantaged as the use of the Bus Pass is not permitted on many community transport schemes.2.2 Local Bus and sometimes Train Services are reduced and this is happening at the same time as Post Offices are closing along with other previously provide facilities, drop in centres, local group meetings, all of which funds are being withdrawn from.2.3 With the cessation of Taxi card, Dial a Ride, Post Bus etc. which compounds many of the problems it means the most vulnerable in society are disadvantaged.2.4 The summation of the questions posed by the Committee lead inexorably to one question, that of cost. Setting aside clichés like "Main Challenges" and " Identify Demand" the real question is Bullet Point 6 which comes down simply to how do you fund transport in isolated communities.2.5 The simple answer is that society has to accept that give older people Inclusion and the provision of adequate transport is part of that Inclusion, they are able to contribute.2.6 Not all older people are without some disposable income which they will spend in the Towns and villages, if they can get there. Older person's health and well-being is better which is a cost benefit to NHS. Car usage is reduced which has environmental advantages.2.7 Most importantly by the mobility Inclusion brings older people do much volunteer work of great financial benefit to the wider society.2.8 Attached is some research solely directed at assessing that value. It is acknowledged that the example is not of a rural nature but the principle is the same. There are also other erudite examples of research which are available to illustrate this point.2.9 It is essential adequate Rural Transport is provide for if by that Inclusion older people are able to leave their homes they will not be seen as tomorrows problem but part of tomorrows solution.&#xa0;August 2013&#xa0;