&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted]]]

[[[ by University of Oxford (GSH0003)]]]Understanding the extent to which Negative Emissions Technologies could and should be deployed is essential for the development of policy relating to climate change.Summary

[[[&#xa0;]]]About the Authors&#xa0;4.— Steve Rayner is Professor of Science and Civilization and Director of the Institute of Science, Innovation and Society at the University of Oxford. His expertise is in the relationship between science and society and he was a member of the Royal Society’s working group on geoengineering.— Catherine Redgwell is Chichele Professor of Public International Law at the University of Oxford. Her expertise is in the fields of international energy law and international environmental law and she was also a member of the Royal Society’s working group on geoengineering.— Julian Savulescu is Professor of Practical Ethics and Director of the Uehiro Centre and Institute for Science and Ethics at the University of Oxford. His expertise is in the fields of applied and practical ethics, especially of new technology.—&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Richard Darton is Professor of Engineering Sciences at the University of Oxford and President of the European Federation of Chemical Engineering. His expertise is in gas separation processes and the development of sustainability metrics.—&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Myles Allen is Professor of Geosystems Science and Head of the Climate Dynamics Group at the University of Oxford. His expertise is in using computer modelling to quantify the contribution of human and other external influences on climate.— Tim Kruger is a James Martin Fellow at the University of Oxford. His expertise is in the technical aspects of geoengineering, specifically processes which involve removing greenhouse gases from the atmosphere – otherwise known as Negative Emissions Technologies.&#xa0;Professors Rayner, Savulescu and Darton are the co-Directors of the Oxford Geoengineering Programme, an initiative of the Oxford Martin School at the University of Oxford, which aims to assess the technical, social, environmental and ethical issues associated with all proposed geoengineering techniques. Kruger is the Programme Manager.&#xa0;&#xa0;Negative Emissions Technologies – an appropriate Case Study5. The objective of horizon scanning is to try to anticipate the opportunities and threats that will arise in the future, so as to better seize the opportunities and to mitigate the threats. The choice of Negative Emissions Technologies (NETs) as a Case Study for this report is apt - NETs already have a place in the long-term strategy to address the threat of climate change – and this despite the fact that such technologies do not yet exist.6. Avoiding a 2oC rise in mean global temperatures – which has been described as the threshold of ‘dangerous’ climate change – is now well nigh impossible to achieve through conventional mitigation. The AVOID Programme details that global emissions would need to fall by over 3% year-on-year from 2016 onwards, which, set against the long-term average 3% year-on-year increase that we have seen, seems highly improbable. The UNEP Emissions Gap Report (2012) details how scenarios that avoid a 2oC rise achieve this by postulating the deployment of technologies that remove greenhouse gases from the atmosphere – NETs. As the Report wryly observes “To achieve such negative emissions is simple in analytical models but in real life implies a need to apply new and often unproven technologies or technology combinations at significant scale.”(p3) 7. The IPCC’s RCP2.6 scenario, which does envisage a world where temperature rises are limited to less than 2oC, employs NETs at a massive scale. DECC’s 2050 Pathways Calculator Tool, which provides guidance on how the UK is to achieve its commitment to reduce emissions by 80% by 2050 as part of the Climate Change Act 2008, has NETs as one of its options.8. And yet NETs are what are known as ‘technological imaginaries’ – they do not yet exist, we do not know if they can be developed and even if we could develop them, we do not know if they could be deployed at a material scale, ethically and acceptably.9. The Royal Society’s report (Geoengineering the Climate: Science, Risk and Uncertainty) in 2009 undertook a preliminary assessment of NETs as part of a wider examination of the issues associated with geoengineering. It recognised the scant knowledge base and broad research gaps associated with the field and proposed an interdisciplinary research effort to fill those gaps. They recommended that the UK spend £100m over the course of the next ten years as part of an international effort to research these issues. (Recommendation 7.4 p62).10. Since then the UK Research Councils have funded three projects related to geoengineering – the Integrated Assessment of Geoengineering Proposals (IAGP), the Stratospheric Particle Injection for Climate Engineering (SPICE) and Climate Geoengineering Governance (CGG). The total funding committed to these three projects, which all end in 2014, is less than £5m. There are currently no calls for proposals in this area. Halfway through the Royal Society’s ten-year timeline, less than 5% of the recommended spend on research will have been committed.11. One often-quoted rationale for not undertaking such research is the belief that, if technologies existed that could counter climate change, then they could undermine the will to cut emissions. Another, unstated rationale, may be a fear that research would reveal that the cupboard is bare – that NETs, which are tacitly assumed in projections which avoid dangerous climate change, are not up to the job. Projections that avoid dangerous climate change require steep reductions in emissions and large amounts of negative emissions. If negative emissions are not feasible, then we will experience dangerous climate change despite steep, and economically painful, emission cuts.12. The former argument is often referred to as ‘moral hazard’ – if people believe there is a technological ‘get-out-of-jail-free’ card, they will try less hard. The latter argument could be described as ‘morale hazard’ – if people believe that avoiding dangerous climate change is impossible despite steep emission cuts, it undermines the will to endure such actions.13. Ignorance of the potential – or lack of potential – of NETs may serve climate negotiators well: NETs can be included in scenarios that avoid dangerous climate change to provide hope that avoiding 2oC is achievable, while not examining them too closely as this may a) provide too much hope or b) dash such hopes altogether. 14. But ignorance comes at a heavy price. If such technologies could be safely deployed at scale, we need to understand the constraints and trade-offs occasioned by their use and invest in developing such technologies, so that they could be deployed in a timely, efficient and ethical manner. If such technologies cannot be deployed at scale, then we will either need to further increase our emission-reduction efforts, or to increase adaptation efforts to address the resulting dangerous climate change – or entertain some other geoengineering scenario.15. Understanding the extent to which NETs could and should be deployed is essential for the development of policy relating to climate change.16. There has been a long-term sensibility to the issues raised by geoengineering from legislators, as evidenced by two enquiries undertaken on the subject by Select Committees in 2008/9 and 2009/10. This interest from elected representatives and the recommendations that they have made in their reports has far outpaced the action from policymakers and Research Councils. This runs contrary to the commonly held assumption relating to Horizon Scanning that politicians have an attention span that is limited by the electoral cycle.17. Those two previous Parliamentary enquiries – “Engineering: turning ideas into reality” – Innovation, Universities, Science and Skills Committee in 2008/9 and “The Regulation of Geoengineering” – Science and Technology Committee in 2009/10  – made detailed recommendations. The former recommended “In order ‘to sort the wheat from the chaff’ and identify those geo-engineering options it may be feasible to deploy safely in the future, it is essential that a detailed assessment of individual technologies be conducted. This assessment must consider the costs and benefits of geo-engineering options including their full life-cycle environmental impact and whether they are reversible.” (paragraph 197), while the latter called for public engagement and international cooperation on the creation of a regulatory framework for research. The latter also had as one of its conclusions: “We recommend that the Government review its policy on geoengineering to give it greater priority” (paragraph 49).18. The two Select Committee Reports and the Royal Society report share a common conclusion: the need for interdisciplinary assessment of the proposed technologies. Such research needs to be undertaken in conjunction with policymakers, industry and civil society actors, and needs to be mindful of the public acceptability of new technologies.Horizon Scanning more generally19. Turning to Horizon Scanning more generally it is interesting to note that the three Case Studies chosen are all examples of “Emerging Technologies” and as such constitute just one of the five categories that are addressed by the Cabinet Office’s Horizon Scanning Programme. The other four are “Emerging Economies”, “Changing Supply and Demand of Resources”, “Changing Social Attitudes of Young People” and “The Future of Demographic Change in the UK”. If the purpose of the enquiry is to ensure that the UK is better prepared to address future challenges, then it is essential that all these categories are addressed.20. In addition to these categories it is also important to note the role of unforeseen events. The Fall of the Berlin Wall, the 9/11 Attacks, the Global Financial Crisis are all examples of events that were not widely anticipated and have had enormous policy implications. As well as scanning the horizon to pre-empt threats and exploit opportunities, we would be wise to recognise the limits of our abilities and ensure that we arm ourselves with flexibility to address the unexpected. This is especially relevant as the world we live in becomes an ever-more tightly coupled complex system, in which we can expect more “normal accidents” (as described in the synonymous book by Charles Perrow) to occur. Horizon Scanning is about anticipation of the future, but we must also ensure that we are robust to unanticipated futures as well. The most surprising future would be a future without surprises. 21. Horizon Scanning can struggle to present such unforeseen events. There are so many possible surprises (and the reason that they are surprises is that they are far from the run of the ordinary), that scenario planners tend to triage ‘Black Swan’ (high-impact, low-probability) events lest they undermine credibility with their audience. This self-censorship can limit the utility of such exercises.22. Self-censorship can also occur when the scenarios, or the recommended responses to the scenarios, are seen as politically unpalatable. The perception that such scenarios could be subject to Freedom of Information requests can lead to a degree of conservatism in the findings, which is at odds with the need to think ‘out-of-the-box’.  While openness and transparency are a fundamental precondition for maintaining public trust and confidence in areas which may raise controversial ethical or risk issues (as concluded in the highly regarded House of Lords Science and Technology Committee “Science and Society Report” of 2000), it may be that the benefits that un-self-censored Horizon Scanning can confer outweigh the benefits of transparency in some circumstances. An appropriate analogue is the occasional use of the Chatham House Rule, which to an extent obscures transparency, but with the benefit of enabling free and open discussion.   &#xa0;23. A further constraint of existing Horizon Scanning capabilities is the risk of ‘Groupthink’. The current focus of Horizon Scanning as a cross-departmental forum is necessary for the formulation of coordinated policy, but risks being insufficient as it may downplay or exclude other actors. To be most effective, Horizon Scanning needs to have a greater diversity of viewpoints and should also include multiple academic disciplines, civil society perspectives and awareness of the role of public acceptability in the development of new technologies.&#xa0;24. Balanced against these dangers of undue constraints on presenting possible futures are the risks of catastrophism – a propensity to assume worst case scenarios. It is often the most dramatic scenarios which divert attention from the consideration of less sensational, but equally important issues.&#xa0;Recommendations25. To address the challenges of Horizon Scanning, we would suggest the following recommendations for the consideration of the Select Committee:Professor Steve Rayner(University of Oxford)&#xa0;Professor Catherine Redgwell(University of Oxford)&#xa0;Professor Julian Savulescu(University of Oxford)&#xa0;Professor Richard Darton(University of Oxford)&#xa0;Professor Myles Allen(University of Oxford)&#xa0;Mr Tim Kruger(University of Oxford)&#xa0;September 2013&#xa0; http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/avoid/  UNEP (2012) The emissions gap report. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi Shepherd J et al (2009) Geoengineering the climate; science, governance and uncertainty. The Royal Society  See http://gow.epsrc.ac.uk/NGBOViewGrant.aspx?GrantRef=EP/I014721/1 , http://gow.epsrc.ac.uk/NGBOViewGrant.aspx?GrantRef=EP/I01473X/1 and http://www.esrc.ac.uk/my-esrc/grants/ES.J007730.1/read  http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200809/cmselect/cmdius/50/5002.htm  http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200910/cmselect/cmsctech/221/22110.htm  https://www.gov.uk/government/news/horizon-scanning-programme-a-new-approach-for-policy-making  Perrow, Charles. Normal accidents: Living with high risk technologies. Princeton University Press, 2011. Taleb, Nassim Nicholas. The Black Swan : The Impact of the Highly Improbable Fragility. Random House Digital, Inc., 2010. http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld199900/ldselect/ldsctech/38/3801.htm 