&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by The Royal Academy of Engineering (GSH0006)]]]&#xa0;The Royal Academy of Engineering welcomes the Science and Technology Committee’s call for evidence on Government Horizon Scanning. Please find the Academy’s response to the House of Commons questions in the following document. &#xa0;The Academy carries out regular in-depth studies in order to gauge the value of new technologies to government and the wider public and the implications these new developments have on standards and regulations. The Academy also engages in studies that assess and point the way to mitigating risks related to natural hazards or technology failure, such as our Extreme Space Weather (2013) and Global Navigational Satellite Systems (2011).   &#xa0;The Academy has recently held a roundtable discussion on 3D printing and additive manufacturing that was attended by industry representatives, government officials, researchers and Fellows of the Academy. Issues regarding the regulation of these new technologies and the policy challenges presented are noted in the following call for evidence.  &#xa0;As a key aspect of government horizon scanning, the Academy would like to note the important role that European-wide consortia of science and engineering Academies play in international horizon scanning and the valuable role the Chief Scientific Advisor to the President of the European Commission has in leadership of European-level horizon scanning activates. &#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]1. How do Government departments make use of horizon scanning?1.1 The Royal Academy of Engineering and its Fellows play a number of roles in horizon scanning.  The Academy carries out regular in-depth studies that look at the likely development and use of technologies and how they will affect policy and impact on the public. Examples of these include Dilemmas of Privacy and Surveillance published in 2007, which set out a technology roadmap for surveillance and data processing technologies and Electric Vehicles, published in 2010, which looks at the future roll out of EVs and the preconditions for mass uptake. The Academy also engages in studies that assess and point the way to mitigating risks related to natural hazards or technology failure, such as our Extreme Space Weather (2013) and Global Navigational Satellite Systems (2011).   1.2 Both of these kinds of studies are designed to be relevant to government. In some cases, government makes direct use of such advice; in others, the impact and influence needs to be worked through with government departments. It can be challenging for external organisations to ensure that policy advice reaches the right people in a timely fashion, which is why the Academy works to develop its working relationships across government. However, the pathways for internal dissemination of such work are not always clear. 1.3 It is our view that government could make more use of such independent, expert horizon scanning, and the Academy makes efforts to work with partners in government to support this. An example of where the Academy has had success in disseminating its foresight work is with the Extreme Space Weather study which has been taken on board by the Natural Hazards and Civil Contingencies unit within Cabinet Office, where officials are working with the Academy to take forward  recommendations.1.4 Another example of government successfully using the horizon scanning activities of the Academy and other professional organisations is through direct partnership.  In 2011, Defra invited the alliance of engineering professional organisation, Engineering the Future, which is hosted by the Academy, to participate in a project to identify the interdependencies of adapting infrastructure to climate change.  This resulted in the report Engineering, Infrastructure and Climate Change Adaptation. Here, the work of engineers on the future risks to infrastructure was part of a broad, government activity on adaptation to climate change.1.5 However it is very difficult for the Academy, or indeed any independent organisation, to judge just how this expert advice is used. While we have the examples of clear and successful collaboration above, in other areas there is less obvious engagement. 1.6 It is likely that a clearer remit for horizon scanning across government, as set out in the Day Review, would help organisations such as the Academy provide horizon scanning work that is useful to, and usable by, government and to develop relationships with partners in government. A process by which there is a post-report check to establish what changes have been made by government, or reasons why actions were not taken, would show how government has made use of horizon scanning work and would allow informed judgement of whether it makes effective use of independent and internal research. While the stated process might be difficult to achieve, even feedback on relevance and quality of a report could be helpful.2. How effective is horizon scanning in Government? Do Ministers and senior officials consider horizon scanning outputs appropriately?2.1 As noted above, it is not felt that horizon scanning outputs are used as effectively as they could be, or that there is obvious follow up on the recommendations made in horizon scanning activities. It is also felt that individual departments’ efforts at horizon scanning have been uncoordinated and sometimes mutually contradictory.2.2 One challenge for government departments is that they receive a wealth of external reports, which unfortunately are only useful if they reach the appropriate senior civil servant at exactly the right time due to the precise government timetables they work to. Reports can only be of real benefit if they are on an agenda set by Ministers or by external events.&#xa0;For this reason, better on-going communications between government and the external bodies that can produce valuable horizon scanning is needed to ensure that information is received when it is of use.2.3 A key tool in horizon scanning is scenario planning. Effective horizon scanning by government would involve setting out possible scenarios which are not predictions or even extrapolations, but are credible possible futures against which government could say that, if this scenario were to arise, the legislative and policy actions needed would be X, Y and Z.&#xa0;Unfortunately scenario planning has a chequered history in government departments and is considered as labour intensive for policy-makers.2.4 In terms of technological foresight, the relevant technical expertise to deliver tends to be found within the public delivery agencies rather than central government (there are more professional engineers in Ofgem than there are in DECC, for example). &#xa0;Many issues that could benefit from foresight are dealt with by the devolved administrations, with, for example,&#xa0;TfL in contact with the cutting edge of technology rather than DfT. Some of the 'strategic' machinery to support central government processes such as the Sustainable Development Commission and especially the No 10 Strategy Unit have been dismantled by the current coalition Government.2.5 Within the European Union's research funding system, the upcoming Eighth Framework Programme, Horizon 2020, is oriented around a challenge model in which funding is used to solve societal problems by bridging the gap between research and market applications, for example by assisting  innovative enterprises in developing breakthrough technologies into commercial products capable of succeeding in the market. By definition, this model necessitates the scoping of future challenges, which is welcome. However, details of how this horizon scanning will be done and who will do it remain unclear. Also unclear are the time horizons along which it will take place and the role of domestic member-state horizon scanning capabilities in informing the European process.2.6 Another area of interest from a European perspective is the role of the Chief Scientific Advisor (CSA) to the President of the European Commission. This function is still new to the Commission: the first Chief Scientific Advisor, Professor Anne Glover, was appointed in December 2011. Though the role is still in its early stages and appears to involve little formal horizon scanning activity, one of the future roles of a stronger, more institutionalised Chief Scientific Advisor could be participation in or leadership of European-level horizon scanning activities. To achieve this, the CSA role would have to be extended beyond the lifetime of the current President, which is currently a likelihood but not yet a certainty. Moreover, the post would have to be given greater resources and stronger influence in the setting of priorities for research funding and other European-wide scientific and technical activities. 2.7 Another prospective player in European-wide horizon scanning activities are European-wide consortia of science and engineering Academies, many of which leverage the unique skills and experience of their Fellowships to conduct high-quality horizon scanning domestically. For example, the European Council of Applied Sciences Technologies and Engineering (Euro-CASE), a consortium of national engineering Academies of which the Royal Academy of Engineering is part, is working to establish avenues for advising European policy in a systematic and long-term way, using horizon scanning and other approaches to provide timely, objective, evidence-based advise to the European Commission. The use of such consortia by the Commission would enable it to benefit from the accumulated knowledge of the EU's most senior scientists and engineers and to ensure that the advice received is objective and representative of a broad constituency of European experts. 3. What changes could be made to improve existing horizon scanning activity? Will the recommendations made in Jon Day’s review of cross-government horizon scanning capability address current shortcomings? What progress has been made implementing these?3.1 The Day review focuses on Cabinet Office as a potential lead and locus for horizon scanning.  This is a clear choice, and there is already good use of expert analysis within Cabinet Office. Putting Cabinet Office at the centre of horizon scanning should also help support cross-departmental activity. However the review gives less recognition to the central role of Go-Science and the CSAs than would be expected. For government, it is important that the role of science and engineering in understanding future risks and assessing resilience, preparedness and risk management strategies is fully appreciated. Science and technology are not only important for technology horizon scanning, but for identifying broader future scenarios and the factors that influence them and for dealing appropriately with the uncertainty and risk measures in horizon scanning.3.2 The Day review notes the role of academia and think tanks in the horizon scanning processes of government, and we would add that the national academies, research councils and professional bodies such as engineering institutions and learned societies also have a key role to play.3.3 The value of involving independent advice in horizon scanning is that, if organisations perform their own horizon scanning, they are bound to constrain the horizon relative to their experience and knowledge of the organisation. Horizon scanning should be carried out in an environment that is open to challenge and includes the views of those outside of the civil service and government. Improvements to existing horizon scanning capability require involvement of truly independent experts and openness to the challenges they may present. 3.4 As noted above, science and technology expertise is crucial for scenario planning. The solutions available for any problem are highly dependent on how the problem is specified. Narrow specifications that do not correctly incorporate uncertainty effects will produce solutions which are limited in their usefulness. Uncertainty is sometimes not very well incorporated in analysis and it is likely that scientists, engineers and technologists well versed with dealing with uncertainty can produce more accurate results.4. How effective is the Government at responding to policy or regulatory challenges presented by new technologies?4.1 There is an intrinsic challenge in creating policy and regulation for emerging technologies. It is difficult for regulation to keep pace with technology although there is very often a need for a symbiotic relationship between developing technologies and the regulatory machinery to allow a technology to develop, such as autonomous vehicles. Without a regulatory context, it is difficult for industry to invest in developing products that may or may not be permitted for use.  The Academy report Autonomous Systems: social, legal and ethical issues (2009) sets out this challenge.4.2 In the case of 3D printing however, regulation becomes necessary through the application of the technology – if it can be used to produce controlled items or infringes intellectual property rights. We would not want all technical development to be preceded and potentially stifled by regulation but equally well we would not want the development of other technologies to be held up because of the lack of it.&#xa0; 4.3 For government, parliamentary timescales and the need for primary legislation probably contribute to this reactive position, but a robust system of horizon scanning should allow government to be better prepared for the emergence and uptake of new technologies.4.4 Stronger candidates for horizon scanning tend to be infrastructure based - energy, transport, water and communications – and by implication, this should involve the UK regulators more fully. For example Ofcom Broadband has finalised a clear regulatory framework to promote investment, competition and innovation.5. Case studies:What are (or were) the policy challenges presented by this technology? How have these challenges been identified?5.1 The Royal Academy of Engineering recently held a roundtable meeting on 3D printing and additive manufacturing and its potential impact on UK industry. The key challenges for this sector of manufacturing with an impact on policy were:5.2 These issues have been identified by groups such as the Work Foundation and Big Innovation Centre at the University of Lancaster, whose report Three Dimensional Policy: Why Britain needs a policy framework for 3D printing articulated many of these policy issues. See: http://www.theworkfoundation.com/DownloadPublication/Report/322_3D%20printing%20paper_FINAL_15%20Oct.pdfHow prepared is (or was) the Government to react to challenges presented by this technology? How effective was this reaction?5.3 The Academy is aware that Government is supporting this new sector within manufacturing through BIS funding of the High Value Manufacturing Catapult network, with £200 million in funding across 7 centres. The Technology Strategy Board and the Research Councils have run competitions to stimulate the exploration of new design freedoms in 3d printing. What are (or were) the policy challenges presented by this technology? How have these challenges been identified?5.4 The Royal Academy of Engineering published a report in 2009 on the social, legal and ethical issues relating to autonomous systems including transport. The report identified the following policy issues:5.5 This area of technology is still in the relatively early stages of development.  However, there have been developments in the understanding of intelligent transport systems, as set out in the Intelligent Mobility study carried out by the Automotive Council, which is supported by BIS: http://www.automotivecouncil.co.uk/intelligent-mobility/5.6 Foresight also carried out a detailed study on intelligent infrastructure in 2005: http://www.bis.gov.uk/foresight/our-work/projects/published-projects/intelligent-infrastructure-systems How prepared is (or was) the Government to react to challenges presented by this technology? How effective was this reaction?5.7 This area of technology is in relatively early stages and it is difficult to make claims about government’s response at this point. 5.8 In the case of Autonomous Road Vehicles, it would be easier to look at the air or rail sectors first, which are already highly regulated and easier technical. The rail industry produced a set of scenarios a few years ago that illustrate the process well, and it would be valuable to carry out such scenario planning for autonomous road vehicles and intelligent transport infrastructure. It is certainly essential for relevant scenarios to be explored before the technologies mature. No comment.September 2103

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;