&#xa0;&#xa0;Written evidence submitted by NHS England.&#xa0;Summary&#xa0;On behalf of NHS England, this report details the adverse potential in the recent welfare reform bill in respect of people who undertake or need to undertake dialysis at home. Home dialysis is more affordable, yet offers better medical and personal outcomes than dialysis in hospitals and stand alone centres. However, undertaking therapy at home requires additional space and traditionally spare bedrooms have been used. The recent changes in benefits have highlighted the issue of penalising people who undertake treatment at home.&#xa0;Background&#xa0;1) People with kidney failure need long term treatment in the form of either dialysis or transplantation. At the beginning of 2012, 53207 adults received replacement therapy, of which 26910 were on dialysis (UK Renal Registry Report 2012). For an individual on dialysis, the treatment is required on a regular basis several times a week. There are two forms of dialysis – haemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis.&#xa0;2) Haemodialysis requires treatment a minimum of three times per week. The individual is attached to a dialysis monitor that enables blood to be removed and 'cleaned' through a filter before being returned to the patient. A dialysis session can last from 4 hours up to 8 hours, during which time the individual is attached to the system. The machine is about the size of a domestic fridge, requires electricity and purified water and the treatment uses disposal filters and plastic tubing.&#xa0;3) Peritoneal dialysis (PD) involves therapy everyday. Fluid is drained into the abdomen via a permanently positioned plastic catheter. After a period of time, the fluid is drained off and fresh fluid instilled. This treatment may be carried out by hand (generally by the patient or a carer) four time a day, using bags that contain 2 litres of fluid, or via an automated machine that runs overnight, using 5 litre bags. In both case, there is a need to store large quantities of fluid and other equipment.&#xa0;4) PD is traditionally carried out in the home. Within the UK 3831 people use this system. It is convenient, safe and effective. It also allows individuals to continue a much higher level of independence, including working, education and holiday travel.&#xa0;5) In contrast, the majority of haemodialysis (HD) is carried out in centres dedicated to dialysis. In the UK 23079 people undertake HD. They need to travel to units three times a week (haemodialysis patients travel about 40 million miles per year across the UK), often at times inconvenient to them. It reduces the opportunity for education and employment and only limited opportunities to go on holiday. However, in recent years, patients have been offered the opportunity to have HD at home. In the last registry report 905 patients were at home. It allows those individuals to have greater flexibility, much less wasted travel time and also the ability to undertake more treatment that results in better outcomes. For example, people using haemodialysis at night (nocturnal HD) for 5-6 sessions per week have a survival equivalent to that of having a kidney transplant.&#xa0;6) However, to take advantage of both of these home based treatments, the individual needs space – a dedicated room to undertake the treatment, with the correct equipment, in a clean safe environment and the ability to store equipment and consumables. Many dialysis patients require rehousing into funded accommodation and in the past specific renal social workers have made the case for extra rooms for this purpose. It is important to realises that social deprivation is relatively high in the dialysis population and so housing needs are high.&#xa0;7) This is on the background of the need to increase the proportion of people who have dialysis at home. This is a core fundamental of NHS England strategy to engage patients and carers, provide them with holistic solutions and to improve quality whilst containing cost. Currently, less than 20% have dialysis at home with a need to increase that proportion to 30%. The direct UK dialysis health costs is close to £1 billion pounds, but does not take into account admissions, drugs and transportation. It is therefore important that the social context of home based dialysis therapies are considered. If a patient moves to HD from PD, the therapy bill increases by £100 per week and the cost of hospital transport is also incurred (£40-80 per week).&#xa0;8) With the recent welfare reforms patient groups have been increasingly reporting that patients on home based dialysis have benefit reductions instituted. A number of case studies are enclosed. The situation across the country remains patchy though. In some areas no adjustments have been made whilst in others temporary support via&#xa0;discretionary housing benefit has been offered. The latter response is welcome but it is only temporary. Unless someone receives a transplant, dies or moves to in centre haemodialysis the situation is unresolved.&#xa0;9) On behalf of NHS England, I would ask that consideration be given to this group of individuals as worthy of exemption from aspects of the welfare reforms. The desire to restore a degree of independence and a willingness to undertake complex therapy should not be penalised. As a system, we need to encourage more people to have dialysis at home and I have concerns that this will have a negative impact on that aspiration.&#xa0;&#xa0;Case studies&#xa0;&#xa0;Report from Preston social workerMR WLives with wife and 3 school age childrenHe lost his house and business (was B and B owner) and was declared bankrupt (had home haemodialysis).I supported him with housing and liaised with housing department for rehousing.Family was offered a house with one extra bedroom to facilitate home haemodialysis. House was accepted the about 4 weeks before new bedroom tax came into effect. Spare room started to be adapted for haemodialysis. Only eligible for discretionary payment if family are actively seeking smaller accommodation..Now family looking at rehousing and Mr W will have to have hospital based treatment.&#xa0;Report from Stevenage social worker&#xa0;I have one pt who has 2 bed property and wants home therapies but is being told he has to move and cannot afford the extra tax.One other has 2 bedroom and needs the spare bedroom for her family to stay overnight as she needs support at night sometimes, so family act as her carer, going to apply for discretionary housing grant.&#xa0;Report from Nottingham paediatric social worker&#xa0;Two families awaiting a response from their local councils to see if they qualify for the discretionary housing benefit. However, I have had one successful outcome with a family in Sheffield, a single parent with two children under ten living in a three bedroom house. The eldest child had a transplant last year but still requires an overnight feed. They moved to a three bedroom house because the younger child kept being disturbed by the machine and her brother is sometimes very unsettled or indeed vomits.&#xa0;We applied for the discretionary housing benefit to cover the loss in her housing benefit. Although we were successful, the housing officer explained that councils have a limited budget for this benefit and that once this money ran out the payment could stop even if the circumstances remained the same. Families can apply again but there could potentially be periods when they don’t receive the benefit whilst they await a decision.&#xa0;The other families who are awaiting decisions are for different reasons. One is a haemodialysis patient but he has other health problems. The house is near the hospital and had been adapted so moving would be disruptive. The third family have a child with renal disease but he has severe behavioural issues and does not sleep very well so sharing with a sibling is not ideal.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;Report from Manchester social worker&#xa0;Mr DN- Haemodialysis patient at Tameside dialysis unit- Lived in a 3 bedroom property and following his 19 year old son moving out last year he would have been penalised by the tax.- I assisted him to complete a form for medical rehousing- Mr N moved to a one bedroom flat. He had a suspected CVA which his family think may be linked to the stress of the move. He has renal failure, diabetes and history of CVA. GP recently referred to the memory clinic for assessment- BKPA funded the move, new blinds and a cooker- He could not apply for a CCG as they have been phased out- Applied for the Manchester Welfare scheme and was refused a cooker and given a microwave instead (hence we referred to BKPA)&#xa0;Mr SW- Pre dialysis patient- Moved from two bed room flat to one bedroom to avoid possible additional charge- Was considering home haemodialysis but now does not have the room so will probably be dialysing in a unit&#xa0;&#xa0;Mrs SA (application made for discretionary housing payment)- Dialysis patient on MRI renal dialysis unit- Lives with her daughter who studies at college. A second daughter lives in Longsight and has a child with autism- the second daughter will stay overnight in the week to give the first daughter a break- They have a three bedroom property- We do not know outcome of DHP application yet&#xa0;Mr IB&#xa0;- Current inpatient at MRI. Transferred to nursing home to wait for major adaptations at home.- two bedroom property- For home will require extra large wheelchair, hoist/commode/space for carers to transfer/ramp etc. and full care package.- lack of space for equipment to be used for argument for second bedroom in DHP application when medically fit- If home HD is provided Mr IB will be living independently with package of care.26 &#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;