

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Written evidence submitted by South Yorkshire Refugee Law and Justice (LAI 0026)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]South Yorkshire Refugee Law and Justice is a small voluntary organisation which assists refused asylum seekers to obtain fresh evidence and to progress their claim for asylum or human rights protection. This is usually where they have a basis to make further submissions for a fresh claim, and occasionally where they are appealing to the Tribunal. Our first course of action for all our clients is to enable them to obtain new legal representation wherever possible.&#xa0;South Yorkshire Migration and Asylum Action Group is a broad-based group of many nationalities and political viewpoints acting together for asylum and migrant rights. SYMAAG campaigns for action by Government and others to improve the position of asylum seekers (particularly those who have been refused) and exploited migrant workers (including the victims of trafficking).&#xa0;ASSIST is a Sheffield charity which supports destitute refused asylum seekers. &#xa0;Our joint response to this consultation is confined to those questions which relate directly or indirectly to our work, and which are within our knowledge. We are aware that our clients may be affected in other ways beyond the scope of our response.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;We profoundly disagree with the proposal to limit legal aid to those with a ‘strong connection’ with the UK, firstly on principle. It is a fundamental tenet of the rule of law that all are equal before the law. The legal aid system does not create new causes of action where none exist. It enables access to a court to those who otherwise would not have the means to enforce their rights. It is a means to obtain the legal protection which an affluent person in the same situation would be able to obtain. If the law does not provide a means to take action, then there is nothing for legal aid to fund. &#xa0;Access to the UK courts is already restricted by rules of jurisdiction to people who are connected with the UK. A purely foreign issue cannot be transferred to the UK courts on the whim of a litigant. The requirement for a ‘strong connection’ to qualify for legal aid does not affect the jurisdiction of the courts, it only prevents poorer people from accessing the rights which others have. &#xa0;The government’s consultation document which launched these proposals says that people can sue in the English courts if they have never set foot in the UK. However, this is only the case if the body which they say has wronged them is based in the UK. Ground-breaking and critical human rights cases have been of this kind – for instance the case brought by the family of Baha Mousa, which established that he was wrongfully killed by British forces in Iraq. Stopping legal aid in situations of this kind will effectively restore immunity for serious abuses. This case makes it clear that it is not necessary for a legally aided claimant to have a connection with the UK for the case to be a British matter. Perhaps it also makes clear that litigants do not always choose their situation, and litigation is not a luxury. &#xa0;It is not only such extreme situations that require a remedy. It is entirely inappropriate to require a ‘strong connection’ in any public law case unless it is accepted that an act or omission of government creates that strong connection. Where the state makes mistakes which radically affect the life of an individual or, worse, subjects that individual to abuse of power, the person needs a remedy and it is unconscionable to suggest that their need for a remedy is related to their residential status. &#xa0;It is a fundamental article of the European Convention on Human Rights that the rights contained in it extend to everyone within the jurisdiction of the contracting states (Article 1). This was debated at the time of the drafting of the ECHR. Contracting parties considered whether to impose a test of lawful residence and decided against it. They did so because human rights are fundamentally undermined if they are available to some and not all. The UK’s Human Rights Act replicates this approach. &#xa0;To restrict access on the basis of residence is to turn back the clock to 1945, before nations talked together about how to avoid repetition of the atrocities that had just ended, and risks violation of Article 14 of the Convention by discriminating in the delivery of rights.   &#xa0;While we oppose in principle the requirement for a ‘strong connection’, we also consider that the suggested means for establishing it are misconceived. A ‘strong connection’ is not established by lawful residence but by actual residence. Lawful residence is a technical concept which in no way governs whether a person’s rights are breached. For instance, the child of a refused asylum seeker may not be lawfully resident, nevertheless she may never have known any other home. &#xa0;We are very pleased that the government has agreed to restore eligibility for legal aid to refused asylum seekers to pursue a fresh claim and challenge its refusal. This was vital, given the fundamental problems that still remain in the asylum decision-making process. We are also very pleased that eligibility has been restored for victims of trafficking, domestic violence and forced marriages, and for children in protection cases. However, children faced with homelessness will not be exempted from the residence test. In this and other areas of the proposals, particularly those relating to judicial review, we suggest that the fact that the proposals as developed are subject to an ever-increasing list of exceptions illustrates the point that the reforms are not workable and risk the safety of vulnerable people.  &#xa0;In addition to the list of exceptions the government response suggests that people will be able to apply for exceptional funding. We believe that whether this is in fact the case is not substantiated. Under the Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 s.10, exceptional funding may only be applied for whether the case is not within the scope of legal aid. Where a person does not meet the residence criteria their case will still be in scope and thus not eligible for exceptional funding. The resulting scheme would be massively complex, even more so than the current legal aid scheme, which is already taxing and difficult to understand. A system of exceptions and applications for exceptional funding which may be applied for in some cases but not others will result in eligibility for legal aid becoming an obscure matter, and not publicly accessible. This is turn is likely to generate mistakes and poor practice.&#xa0;In relation to non-asylum matters, the imposition of a test of lawful residence creates a new minefield for solicitors and their clients. Immigration and nationality law is highly technical and the vast majority of practising solicitors have never learned anything about it, and have no-one in their firm who can advise on such issues. Regardless of this, they will be required to assess whether their client has lawful residence before granting legal aid. In immigration law there will be many common situations in which a solicitor may not know whether the client is lawfully resident, or even whether they are British. For instance, what of the international student who is studying and progressing in their studies, but who has worked more hours than they are permitted to do? What of a spouse whose application for further leave to remain has just been refused? An EEA national who has been made redundant? The holder of a BOC passport? Even in relation to asylum seekers where the explicit exception is made, we think that for the non-specialist, the difference between an asylum seeker awaiting a tribunal hearing and one who is hoping to assemble evidence for a fresh claim may not be easily understood.&#xa0;Consequently the potential for people’s immigration status to be wrongly assessed is enormous. Indeed we expect that non-immigration solicitors will be reluctant to engage in this assessment. Thus we are concerned that asylum seekers and refugees may both be refused legal aid for essential proceedings in for instance family or housing matters, simply because the solicitor is not able to assess their status, or chooses not to take clients where this may be an issue. Regulations and guidance will be provided, but these are unlikely to be comprehensive. Assessing lawful residence will be another field for exceptions and mistakes, but the individual will have no means to compel a challenge to a solicitor who makes a wrong assessment. &#xa0;We are concerned about the message which the government gives by proposing the criterion of a ‘strong connection’ with the UK in order to receive legal aid. As community organisations we are aware of the increase in tensions around immigration and asylum. Following the murder of drummer Lee Rigby there was an upsurge in divisive narratives. The government has a critical role to play in the policies which it sets out. The recent cuts in welfare benefits are one of the most potent factors escalating anti-immigrant feeling. Where the government underscores this division by promoting the idea that there is a ‘strong connection’ with this country which can be measured in the way suggested and which should function as a criterion of obtaining access to justice, the government itself risks endorsing and escalating these dangerous divisions in our society. We urge the government to take note of the danger of pursuing this path at a time of hardship for many people in this country.&#xa0;The proposal also obscures the fact that legal aid is already subject to a test on the basis of the merits of the case and the means of the applicant. These are proper criteria for public funding. Unmeritorious cases are not funded. &#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[2) The proposal that providers of legal services in applications for judicial review against public bodies should only be paid for work done on the case if the Court ]]]

[[[grants permission for the application to proceed]]]&#xa0;This proposal both as originally put and as now amended is very complex in its implications. The complexity itself is an obstacle to efficient litigation and fairness. &#xa0;Our understanding from legal practitioners is that very often it is the pre-action steps in judicial review which are effective, in that the Home Office will often then concede the case, or retract the decision. These pre-action steps will still be legally aidable, but part of what makes them effective is the anticipation that judicial review proceedings will follow if no settlement is achieved. What the proposed changes will do is heighten the risk for practitioners of issuing judicial review proceedings, no doubt increasing their caution in issuing proceedings. The chances of success in a public law action are hard to predict, and there is scope for more than one reputable view of the likely outcome of an application. The proposal introduces a costs mechanism which will influence the conduct of litigation in a situation where the applicant has no alternative remedy to protect life and limb. As set out above, a person subjected to a government mistake, abuse or omission cannot choose some alternative path such as mediation, as suggested in the consultation document. Public law matters are not susceptible to these alternatives. &#xa0;Figures for the outcome of judicial review applications do not factor in those cases where the less expensive pre-action steps, backed up by the real threat of judicial review, have succeeded.&#xa0;We suggest that the most effective and just way to reduce public spending on legal aid on asylum and immigration matters is to improve the quality of Home Office handling of applications, thereby reducing the need for court time or pre-action steps.&#xa0;We are aware of the very tight constraints on legal aid firms locally who do immigration and asylum work. It is already often difficult to find a representative who can act quickly and effectively. We would be very concerned if solicitors were made to shoulder the costs of preparing an application for judicial review. Our fear is that asylum seekers and refugees would find it extremely difficult to get any representation in what are sometimes the most critical situations (e.g. when faced with detention or removal).&#xa0;The proposal might encourage a kind of brinkmanship in the government side, and settling the case (i.e. withdrawing a possibly life-threatening decision such as to remove someone from the UK) may become less a matter of finding an effective way to see justice done, and more a gamble on the applicant’s solicitor being unwilling to bear the risk of (further) costs by going to court. It is obvious that this is not a way to ensure justice or access to a court, especially where people are vulnerable to life-threatening effects of state action. &#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[3)The proposal that legal aid should be removed for all cases assessed as having “borderline” prospects of success.]]]&#xa0;This proposal ignores the unpredictable nature of public law and the very high stakes for the client. As with the previous points, these proposals miss the issues that are at stake in asylum cases. It cannot be right for the UK, as a signatory to the Refugee Convention, to deny a hearing where an asylum seeker’s challenge to removal or the refusal of their claim is slightly more likely to succeed than fail. The standard of proof in refugee cases is ‘a reasonable degree of likelihood’ that the feared risk will materialise. As Sedley LJ said, comparing the refugee claim to a faulty type of car, even if only one car in ten actually crashes, most people would think there was a real risk of travelling in such a car. If they had a choice they would not do it. When the risk is of death or serious injury, a borderline case is one that must be heard. &#xa0;In our experience, asylum cases assessed as borderline may be those where successive errors and omissions have eroded and obscured the merits of the case, but where significant issues remain to be properly determined. An assessment as borderline may be the wisest course for a legal aid practitioner who is not able to really delve into the history of the matter or test out perhaps contentious legal points until they have the funding to do so. Where the law is unclear, disputed or needs to be tested, a legal aid practitioner may not in conscience be able to assess the merits as more than borderline, but it is precisely these cases which need the protection of publicly funded advice and representation. &#xa0;We are very concerned that the people who have already had the worst experience of justice and fairness within the system will, if this rule is imposed, be the very ones who will suffer again and be effectively excluded from protection. Again we would stress, asylum cases are often about life and death issues. Access to a court is not a luxury. &#xa0;The strength of the case is only one dimension of assessing its importance and whether the public purse should fund it. The importance of the matter at stake should also be a criterion, and where breaches of fundamental rights are in issue, as they are in asylum cases, the threshold should be a low one. This is to protect the individual and to offer scrutiny to protect the public authority from a breach of its international obligations.&#xa0;September 20135South Yorkshire Refugee Law and Justice Charity No: 1146748  

[[[N201200046]]]&#xa0;&#xa0; ECHR Travaux-ART1-COUR(77)9 pp.34 and 49, Report of the Sub-Committee instructed to make a preliminary study of the amendments proposed by the members of the Committee of Experts (5 February 1950) (1)&#xa0; Batayav v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1489 