&#xa0;Written evidence from the Public Transport Users’ Committee for Wales (TIC 110)&#xa0;1.1              The Public Transport Users’ Committee for Wales (PTUC) welcomes the opportunity to contribute to this inquiry.  1.2              The PTUC is a committee which offers advice to Welsh Ministers about strategic issues relating to public transport services in Wales from the perspective of users’ experiences and needs.1.3              The present arrangements relating to Wales are that although much of the control over rural transport has been devolved to Wales there remains a degree of overall regulation and statutory frameworks that are the remit of Westminster. We felt it was thus appropriate for PTUC (Wales) to make a submission on this issue.1.4              In terms of rural transport, especially in terms of the bus and community transport sectors, the detailed specifications and funding streams are within the remit of Welsh Government, and it is mainly at this level that service frequencies, connections and much in the way of quality of provision is specified. 1.5              Rural transport is of critical importance because of its impact on health and well-being, and the positive impact improved connectivity can play in promoting economic renewal and helping reduce poverty. Rural public transport promotes social inclusion, while having a role to play in reducing the environmental cost of transport. It is our view that at present users are not at the heart of service delivery and this can lead to services that are optimised around provider needs rather than around the needs of the user.1.6              Wales is a predominantly rural nation, and a major concern is that the provision of rural public transport relies heavily on community transport, which is patchy and generally not developed strategically.1.7              The regulation of bus services in rural areas and anti-competitive laws act in a way to reduce co-ordination of low frequency services. Regulations which may well have a place in an urban setting, where competition occurs between commercial service providers, is wholly unsuited to rural and deeply rural regions with a mix of low frequency commercial and supported services. &#xa0;&#xa0;2.1              The focus is on existing users who may have a voice for example through Bus Users UK and their bus surgeries. Non-users tend not to be considered, and public transport planning, especially in rural areas, is likely to be reactive rather than proactive when new developments occur. Public transport is usually considered after the location of a new development has been finalised, rather than seeking the optimum location on the basis of public transport access.&#xa0;&#xa0;3.1              In rural Wales, for example, there are some bus services that run once per week on a market day in the nearest town. These are designed around access for shopping and medical appointments. Outside of school and college transport, little consideration is given to  the needs of young people. Similarly, little consideration is given to running late evening buses to allow visits to cinemas, concerts etc. There are instances where service timetables are based around operator convenience rather than users, so there may not be a late bus on a Friday or Saturday or to meet an evening train due to a lack of flexibility in drivers hours etc. There remains a concern that some vehicles remain inaccessible for disabled passengers. Or that space on vehicles is taken up by others, such as passengers with  child buggies, which can lead to conflict.&#xa0;&#xa0;4.1              Integration between modes and between different operators is critical. Rural public transport timetables will generally be low frequency; possibly two hourly or worse. The robustness of connections is then far more important than journey time. Regulation and anti-competitive requirements prevent many operators from co-ordinating services so that an appropriate service can be provided at an economic cost.4.2              Uncertainties about longer-term revenue support also raise issues. People will make employment, educational or home location decisions based upon public transport timetables and routes. A change to these could seriously affect the continued viability of such decisions. &#xa0;&#xa0;5.1              Community transport is usually locally based and can be very patchy, with some excellent examples. Publicity tends to be focused on local, regular users. A big issue in the sector remains how to get non-users to realise what is available, and that the service is available for their use. The variable and local nature of community transport makes it difficult for potential users from outside the area to make use of the services. Spreading good practice to areas with less community transport needs to be considered.  Workshops, where practitioners and potential users could develop and understand what is available, are a useful tool to release the potential in this sector.&#xa0;&#xa0;6.1              Development of demand-led services such as bwc-a-bus in Carmarthenshire is one possible solution. Consideration needs to be given to existing users of timetabled services, if these are to be replaced by a demand-responsive system. &#xa0;&#xa0;7.1              Unit costs of traditional public transport are high, and policies that act against integration of public transport services have pushed many rural inhabitants towards the private car. This has reduced the viability and thus the service frequency of many bus routes, and removed many rural railway stations from the network.  Increasing usage will make services more financially viable and this requires a concerted effort to target current non-users. For this group, information on service timetables, access, how to purchase tickets, inter-availability of tickets and accurate, updated information in case of delays are critically important.  7.2              Concerns about road congestion, which are a major driver of increased public transport use in urban areas, are less of a driver in rural areas.&#xa0;&#xa0;8.1              At present, with devolved Governments in Wales and Scotland having differing levels of responsibility over transport, there is an uncertainty over transport planning. For instance rail infrastructure in Wales remains the responsibility of the UK Government, while there is some Welsh Government input into service levels for the Arriva Wales franchise l. Bus services in Wales are funded via four regional transport consortia in alliance with local Authorities for funded services, while the market determines service timetables on commercial routes. The lack of an overarching view is thus a major issue when integration is considered. 8.2              Wales has seen the development of a demand-led rural bus service, called bwc-a-bus, which has replaced previously very infrequent timetabled services in some areas. The scheme has been designed to be more responsive to passengers’ needs. The introduction of bwc-a-bus has seen some inertia by users of the previous timetabled services, and the move from a sparse timetabled service to a bwc-a-bus type demand-led service needs to win the hearts and minds of both existing users (and potential ones. 8.3              A number of recent reports have highlighted the issue of the rising percentage of the population facing transport poverty, meaning that the rising cost of transport leaves people excluded and isolated, unable to access opportunities, from jobs to healthcare, that many take for granted. 8.4              Consideration also needs to be given to younger people. As motoring costs rise, many young people are now delaying driving tests for cost reasons, particularly the high cost of insurance for younger drivers. In rural areas this results in youngsters having to rely on sparse public transport, which seriously restricts access to employment opportunities. A recurring theme is the lack of evening bus services in rural areas reducing opportunities for evening activities such as visits to the cinema or friends, while also removing the chance of working in sectors involving evening or shift work. 8.5              Consideration should be given to the wider impact of rural passenger transport. Community transport is a lifeline for many users. It enables some users to remain living in their own homes for longer, reducing costs for health and social services. Similarly, for people with disabilities, removal of rural public or community transport could well result in increased healthcare or social services costs.8.6              As health services become ever more centralised in specialist units,accessibility to these services needs to be carefully considered. We already see in Wales that one hour public transport journeys to the local general hospital, by can be replaced by the need for very lengthy journeys involving multiple changes and unfamiliar locations.September 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;