

[[[Written evidence submitted by the Prisoners’ Advice Service (PAS) (LAI ]]]

[[[0037)]]]

[[[Introduction ]]]&#xa0;The Prisoners’ Advice Service (PAS) was launched as an independent charity in 1991. PAS was awarded Legal Aid Lawyer of the year award in the category Legal Aid Firm/Not for Profit organisation in 2011. We were also awarded the Longford Prize in 2012.It is the only charitable organisation in the UK with a specific remit to provide free legal advice and information to adult prisoners in England and Wales, and provides advice and assistance on the application of the Prison Rules and conditions of imprisonment. &#xa0;PAS runs a free advice line on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, and responds to some 4000 letters from prisoners requesting advice and information per year. This is again free and is not part of any LAA funding.   &#xa0;PAS does not accept Home Office or Prison Service money as this may affect our independence. We receive most funding from charitable trusts and foundations.   &#xa0;PAS does not conduct litigation on behalf of clients to make money. The legal aid element to our work provides costs protection to our clients. We do not undertake conditional fee arrangements 

[[[Prison law and the ]]]

[[[proposed restriction on the scope of legal aid available to prisoners]]]

[[[:]]]             PAS opposes any reduction in the 

[[[scope]]]

[[[ ]]]of what prisoner cases are eligible for legal aid   The MOJ say that unless a matter engages Article 5 or 6 then it can be dealt with through the complaints system, because it does not raise any real or important legal argument. However the matters under threat of exclusion from public funding often raise issues which involve complex legal argument and which have real importance to both the prisoner, wider society, and ultimately to how much the taxpayer has to contribute to the spend on the criminal justice system as a whole. Categorisation decisions - although such decisions have been held by the European Court of Human Rights not to engage Article 5(4) or Article 6, individual allocation decisions may engage a range of rights under the ECHR. The positive duty to protect prisoners that arises under Articles 2 and 3 may, for example, require placement in a vulnerable prisoners or protected witness unit. A transfer of a prisoner pending trial that prejudices the right to a fair trial may breach Article 6. Similarly a prisoner’s right to family or private life under Article 8 may be engaged by allocation decisions. Issues of procedural fairness have also been regularly highlighted within categorisation decisions (for example R (Hirst) v Home Secretary ([2001] EWCA Civ 378 and R v Governor of HMP Latchmere ex parte Jarvis (CO 4141/98 20 July 1999)&#xa0;A recent case taken by PAS involved a young post-tariff IPP prisoner who was returned from open to closed prison conditions on the basis of two incidents that should have been dealt with by way of the IEP scheme, rather than the adjudication process. Lengthy representations to the Public Protection Casework Section were successful, and the prisoner was able to return to open conditions well in advance of his parole board review. Had he remained in closed conditions prior to his parole hearing, his eventual release would have been significantly delayed.&#xa0;We also represented a foreign national prisoner who had been returned to closed conditions after he had been served a notice of intent to deport by UKBA. He was in paid employment when he was returned. He exhausted the internal prison service complaints procedure and had not received any determinative decision about his security grading. PAS obtained his paperwork and it showed that the prison service had erroneously concluded that because the UKBA had issued an intent to deport letter this required them to remove the prisoner from open conditions. No individual risk assessment had been conducted and his appeals had not been dealt with de novo as they were required to do. After representations and contacting NOMS directly around the correct procedure to be adopted for foreign national categorisation decisions (something he would practically have struggled to be able to do himself), the Area Manager eventually authorised his return to open conditions following the issue of a letter before claim. The prisoner had lost his paid job but was at least able to volunteer at Oxfam for the remainder of his sentence. &#xa0;These cases have 

[[[cost]]] implications for the MOJ budget, because greater conditions of security require greater provision of costs (the cost of maintaining at Category A is some £61k per prisoner, whereas for Category B it is around £34k, and Category C some £31k, with the cost per prisoner in open conditions being much less and can be as low as £17k). This is largely to do with the additional prison staffing costs involved. If a prisoner is kept in conditions of greater security than he requires under the prison service own policy, it costs the taxpayer more money.   &#xa0;Category A decisions These cases can of course engage Article 5; the Court of Appeal in the Williams decision holding that in certain circumstances, fairness required an oral hearing to determine Category A status. However the right to an oral hearing is not automatic and can be contentious. In addition the Courts have repeatedly held that an indeterminate sentence prisoner who is held in Category A conditions will not be released by the Parole Board and therefore the classification of a prisoners as category A has a direct impact on the liberty of the subject.  In 2003 PAS brought the case of Lord which established the right, subject to exceptions, to full disclosure of the Category A reports. However in our experience the Prison Service will still seek to rely on reports of unidentified security issues etc, which they do not disclose to the prisoner. These cases then require arguments around the Data Protection Act, which by their nature are not easy for a prisoner to deal with in the absence of any legal advice.  PAS recently represented someone who had made numerous attempts to seek his removal from High Risk Category A status, arguing that prison service information was either wrong or was not based on evidence. He had tried in vain to deal with the errors through the complaints procedure but had simply got the same response which was that they either had no knowledge of the errors or that the prison computer system was accurate. Representations were made by us around factual errors involved with his index offence, security intelligence, consistency in public policy decision making, and the policy guidance contained in the National Security Framework, a document which is neither in prison libraries or available on the intranet and so is out of reach for prisoners. The end result was that the prisoner was downgraded to Category B. This had wider implications than simply for the particular prisoner, given that his disabled mother was able to visit more regularly, he was able to engage with external educational courses and was able to start to address the rest of his sentence plan.&#xa0;Mother and Baby Units (MBUs) - it has long been the practice of the Prison Service to allow imprisoned women to keep their babies with them in limited circumstances. The allocation of women to MBUs is a highly sensitive issue as separation of a baby from its mother will require strong justification and fair procedure to protect the interests of both the baby and the mother, in order to avoid breaching the right to family life. There are often legal arguments around the policy on flexibility in respect of the age limits for the children, and over what is in the child’s best interests. A mother-to-be does not have an automatic right to a place in a MBU – she has to apply. Over the years PAS has advised numerous women in this process – women whose babies might have otherwise been placed into care. It is vital that assistance continues to be available for this vulnerable group of prisoners.PAS was contacted by a prisoner after she has been refused a place on the MBU.  She said that social services were unsupportive of her application for a place on the MBU and that subsequently a decision had been made to refuse her a place on the basis of social services’ position.  The prisoner’s baby was due in less than 10 days’ time.  We made urgent representations as to her suitability, and obtained permission from Social Services to examine her file. On considering the file there were un-substantiated allegations of behaviour which Social Services had reported as fact. We obtained statements from both family members and professionals involved in her care previously which cast significant doubt on these allegations, and after submitting these statements the prisoner was granted a place on the MBU. Clearly someone incarcerated would not have been able to access the information or obtain statements.  The cost of the case was some £500 to the LSC, and a baby was able to remain with her mother.  If the baby had been placed in care the 

[[[cost]]] both financial and emotionally would have been incalculable.  &#xa0;Close Supervision Centres (CSC) - the Operating Standards say that lawyers can attend two out of four of the Care and Management Plans which are supposed to take place each year.  This is in recognition of the complexity and seriousness of confinement in the CSC.  But it does not come under Advocacy Assistance.  If it goes out of scope there will be no legal aid for this, even though the guidance permits/encourages it.&#xa0;DSPD – this group of prisoners, both because of their particular personalities, vulnerabilities, and location often find access to legal advice very difficult. There are often legitimate disputes over whether there is an identified mental health treatment need as required under the Planning and Delivery Guide, a sufficient PCL-R score to warrant admission, and whether in the case of 18-21 year olds the exceptional basis criteria are met. The entry criteria for women is also slightly different. A prisoner can spend up to 5 years in a DSPD and so the ramifications for them are grave. &#xa0;Adjudications – The ‘sufficient benefit’ test already means the majority of adjudications are dealt with by prisoners without legal assistance save for cases where a finding of guilt will impact on a prisoner’s progress or sentence plan.  The minimum requirement of legal advice and assistance is reflected in the prison service’s own policy guidance on prison disciplinary hearings (PSI 47/2011). The grant of representation is especially important for lifers whose charges are not so serious as to engage Article 6 but where a finding of guilt will have severe consequences (for example if an allegation relevant to the lifer’s risk factors arises which may jeopardise a parole hearing), or where the prisoner is particularly vulnerable. &#xa0;In our experience it is extremely rare for governors to grant representation under Tarrant. PAS recently represented a determinate sentence prisoner with a long history of mental health problems. His application to Category D was delayed pending his appeal against two findings of guilt (despite his recognised mental health history he had been refused representation under Tarrant). After legal arguments to the Public Offender Management Group, both charges were quashed and the Prison Service then made the decision to re-categorise him and transfer to open conditions. The question is not whether the appeal process was satisfactory in this particular case, clearly it was, but rather whether this prisoner with his particular issues would have appealed or felt able to.  &#xa0;PAS has represented some 45 prisoners over the last 3 years who because of legal argument and assistance have had their adjudications either dismissed or quashed on appeal, and who without such intervention would have ended up in conditions of greater security that they required (either as a result of an upgrade in security and a return from open to closed conditions or who would not have been able to achieve a downgrade). Prisoners are not always able to access the PSI on discipline issues, especially given that adjudicators will invariably attempt to push through an adjudication in a very short space of time, often within 7 days.              &#xa0;Segregation – the negative effects of imprisonment are massively compounded when prisoners are segregated and held separately from other prisoners.  In the case of Munjaz it was held that unlawful seclusion may breach Article 3 or 8 of the ECHR on the particular facts of a case. This includes the vulnerability of the prisoner. PAS was contacted by a prisoner held in segregation after he had been placed on the escape list when he had been transferred to prison from a medium secure mental health unit. He had a history of mental health problems and severe self-harming behaviour and had managed to hang himself in segregation before being resuscitated. He had complained that he had not been subject to regular reviews, denied being an escape threat and said such information had been supplied by a patient at the mental health unit who disliked him. His complaints had been ignored. We obtained the security reports relevant to the prisoner after a freedom of information request threat, the disclosed the evidence against him was unsubstantiated and according to their own reports might be false. We also obtained a statement from the mental health unit which indicated that they had concerns around where the information of an escape had come from and its validity. Again this is not something that from a practical point of view a prisoner would be able to obtain readily or easily. Finally we argued that the case law around segregation and article 3 made it clear that special consideration needed to be given to the continuation of segregation or solitary confinement where there were mental health issues or where the prisoner concerned was vulnerable. After correspondence and the threat of legal action over the course of a week, the prisoner was removed from the escape list and segregation, and returned to normal location. This would clearly not have been something that could have been adequately and urgently resolved through the PPO even as an urgent complaint and the threat of the prisoner managing to take his own life was of course significant. &#xa0;Incentives and Earned Privileges (IEP) – These are not matters of no importance and little consequence. PAS represented someone given an IEP warning after complaining that the prison only issued 28 days of medication even though 11 of the 12 months were longer than 28 days.  Repeat prescriptions were only provided on a monthly basis and he therefore went without medication and suffered pain and deterioration for between 2 and 3 days every month save for February. He had been warned that his complaint, in which he described staff as lazy, was rude. He said he had been told what the policy in operation around medication was, and therefore any further complaint would be considered to be harassment and might be subject to further IEP warnings. The complaints system was therefore being actively taken out of his reach under threat of further disciplinary action. We argued that this treatment was an abuse of the IEP Scheme. The IEP system, as set out in PSO 4000 must not be used to punish prisoners and that the Department for Health 2004 Guidance performance Standard 22 confirms that prisoners are entitled to parity of medical treatment under the NHS with other members of the public. After the threat of legal action the Governor, somewhat reluctantly, agreed to remove the IEP warning and to review the medication policy.&#xa0;Release on Temporary Licence (ROTL) – Over the last two years PAS has successfully challenged the then policy that no lifer in Category C conditions could be released on temporary licence save for exceptional circumstances where s/he had been re-categorised to Category D but could not be transferred to an open prison for medical reasons. It has also challenged the policy in respect of Child Care Resettlement leave and also how ROTL eligibility dates were calculated where there were on-going confiscation proceedings. In all these cases the complaint procedures were utilised and the complaints were either dismissed or no adequate response was received. The PPO would have been ineffective because they would only have been able to make a recommendation (usually and purposefully limited to a particular individual case rather than national policy). In all of three cases the client eventually successfully challenged the decisions, with this leading to a wholesale revision of the policy operated by the Prison Service, incorporated in PSI 21/2012.  It has also led to these prisoners being legitimately released earlier than would otherwise have been the case, which has significant 

[[[cost]]] implications.Resettlement - the cases that PAS deals with often involve extremely vulnerable prisoners and their access to and the provision of care needs applicable to them on release, pursuant to s47 of the NHS and Community Care Act 1990 and s21 of the National Assistance Act 1948 in respect of residential accommodation. There are frequently legal arguments as to the meaning of ‘ordinary residence’ in prisoners’ cases, and the presumption in the Department of Health Ordinary Residence Guidance that that a person remains ordinarily resident in the area in which they were living before the start of their sentence.  Recent examples we have dealt with include a 66-year-old, post-tariff automatic life sentence prisoner who has suffered multiple strokes that has left him with dysarthia (poor speech articulation due to problems with speech muscles), weakness of all limbs, difficulty with swallowing, poor appetite and weight loss.  The local authority refused to assess him for services, which led to his application for compassionate release being delayed.  Another was a 79-year-old woman prisoner, who suffered a severe stroke which left her bed-bound. Her local authority refused to assess her for 24 hour care on the basis she was not physically present in their area, rather than applying the ordinary residence test as above.On both of these occasions the availability of legal advice meant the prisoners were able to secure services they had previously been told they were not eligible for, and to their being released earlier and with the proper support.Home Detention Curfew – These matters will only be funded where there is a clear need for a lawyer, either because they engage article 5 issues or where the HDC is subject to an appeal. A successful application for HDC also saves money, as tagging and supervision in the community on HDC is a lot less expensive than the prisoner remaining in prison for another 135 days.PAS represented a prisoner who had received consecutive sentences under the 1991 and 2003 Criminal Justice Act legislation. He had been refused HDC. He had sought to use the internal complaints process without success. The Ombudsman was not an effective remedy because by the time they considered his case, his HDC curfew period would have passed. We argued for ‘exceptional reasons’ based around his disability and age. It was also clear once we had obtained his legal paperwork that they had not followed their own policy on disclosing the reasons for refusal and had also mistakenly calculated his eligibility period because they had not taken into account the case of Noone when calculating his eligibility period for HDC. After a significant amount of correspondence over several weeks, the prison service eventually conceded that the prisoner’s dates had been incorrectly calculated, that he was eligible for consideration under the ‘exceptional reason’ provisions and released him on HDC. The case 

[[[cost]]] the Legal Services Commission £220, the savings were that a man who had been refused early release was now considered suitable, with a saving to the public purse of around £11,000 by his not remaining in prison for a further 135 days.Licence ConditionsPAS represented a 17 year old female with ADHD. She was released from prison with only minimal supervision despite being on MAPPA. When she was released to a hostel she found she was sharing a room with a much older woman with a history of alcohol issues, the room had no pillow and no lighting. She was unsupervised during the evenings and had no purposeful activities. She was told on release that she would be referred to employment access services but this did not happen. Despite her clear needs she was subject to a Community Assessment Framework (which is a simple information sharing report) rather that a s17 Children Act 1989 assessment which imposes on local authorities a general duty to safeguard and promote the welfare of children ‘in need’ in their area. She and her mother had made several complaints about the support she was receiving but Social Services and the Youth Offending Team had failed to respond. It was after legal intervention that a S17 assessment and an attendant assessment for accommodation under s20 could be obtained. She was provided with a care plan, placed in suitable and age appropriate accommodation and has not returned to custody since. If she had remained in the hostel without support, her mother is of the view that she would have been recalled because her daughter would have become frustrated and angry at her situation or tried to get breached in order to get out of the hostel. The 

[[[cost]]] of this case to the Legal Services Commission (now LAA) was £220, she had a 12 month licence period and so the cost of her recall would have been over £40,000 to the public purse.&#xa0;PAS represented a 47 year old man who was coming to the end of a 4 year sentence. He had cognitive dysfunction, severely impaired memory and focal functioning and language impairments; he had learning disabilities, extremely low IQ (mental age of 10 ½ - 11 ½ years); immature behaviour, obsessional tendencies and disinhibition; depression, paranoid thoughts and thoughts of self-harm; post traumatic amnesia; and epilepsy. The Health Care at the prison took the very unusual step of contacting us themselves. They had been unable to secure any services for him on release from Social Services and were concerned as to how he was going to cope in the community. He was himself unable to properly utilise the complaints procedure because of his health issues. After a significant amount of correspondence and the threat of legal action around the issue of ordinary residence Social Services agreed to assess him under the Community Care legislation and he was released with what Health Care considered an appropriate level of support. &#xa0;PAS was contacted by a female prisoner who was in a relationship with someone in the community who had been the victim of the index offence. Both wanted the relationship to continue on release and for them to be able to live together. The area where they proposed to live had further family support available to them both and the offer of employment for the female prisoner. Probation had however insisted that she could not live with her partner because he was the victim of the index offence and that she would have to be released to a hostel in the area she was living in at the time. The issue was further complicated by this particular prisoner having suffered years of domestic abuse whilst in a relationship with another man who continued to reside in the area proposed by probation. Representations around risk and the right to family life were sent to both the prison and probation area involved, and after several months of appeals it was agreed that she could be released to live with her current partner and that arrangements would be made to transfer her case to a different probation area for supervision. It is to be noted that the internal complaints system as utilised by the prisoner had failed to resolve this matter until we intervened. &#xa0;Foreign National Prisoners&#xa0;PAS would want to draw the committees attention to deleterious effect on foreign national prisoners (FNPs) held in prison at the end of their criminal sentence under immigration act powers.  &#xa0;Such detention is without limit of time and without any oversight of the courts; the detainee only appears before a court or tribunal if s/he is able to instigate this. Claims and judicial reviews for challenging detention under immigration powers were also kept in scope by LASPO 2012 due to the importance of the issues at stake. The courts have on a very large number of occasions found that FNPs who have served their sentence have been detained unlawfully, and clearly the ability to challenge the lawfulness of detention should not depend on immigration status.  There is no justification for removing such claims from scope now.  The Supreme Court found that the Home Office has operated an unlawful and secret detention policy for FNPs. The proposed changes to prison law risk increasing the chance that such abuses, on both an individual and systemic level, will go unchecked.&#xa0;Detention under Immigration Act powers is frequently lengthy, and not infrequently for years. Family members, for example of those whose claims for asylum have failed, who are likely to be subsisting on non-cash support under section 4 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, have difficulties in visiting at all, so the location of the detained person may result in isolation from the family and breaches of the Home Office duty under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to have regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the child, whether the detainee’s child be a person under immigration control, settled or a British citizen.&#xa0;Home Office concerns about the risk of absconding affect prison categorisation. Access to rehabilitation programmes and/or planning for release are  affected by presumptions that the person will be removed at the end of the sentence, however strong the case against this may be and however unlikely it is in any event that a decision on return will rapidly be resolved. This all has cost implications for the MOJ if the prison or immigration authorities adopt overly prescriptive policies in these areas.&#xa0;Mental Health&#xa0;We are particularly concerned for those with mental health problems. The Government has four times in the last year been found guilty of breaches of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights for its treatment of foreign national ex-offenders with mental health problems (see for example R (BA) v Secretary of State for Home Department [2011] EWHC 2748 (Admin) and R (S) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWHC 2748 (Admin)).  &#xa0;We represented a prisoner who had been transferred from hospital to prison after an anonymous tip off that he was due to plan an escape. The prisoner was a prolific self- harmer with a long history of mental health issues.  We successfully argued that if the prison service has reasonable grounds to believe that a prisoner requires treatment in a hospital, the Secretary of State comes under a duty to take reasonable steps to obtain the relevant medical advice, and if necessary effect the transfer. We were also able to establish through the police that the anonymous tip off was made from the patient’s phone in the hospital and that the ward manager believed that the call was malicious. The prisoner had been told by both the prison service and forensic services that they were not willing to transfer him back to hospital despite his using the complaints system. However after legal intervention the local forensic services said that they would assess the prisoner again. He was deemed to satisfy the criteria for transfer back to hospital under s47 of the Mental Health Act 1983, to be of low enough risk to be held in a hospital, and was duly transferred so he could receive appropriate treatment in a safe environment.  &#xa0;The viability and merits of the complaints system to resolve issues Governors are not independent of the institutions in which they workThe Independent Monitoring Board’s caseload is almost totally now to do with property complaints (some 90-95% on their own estimates), which are not legally aided. They have no enforcement powers anyway.The MOJ attempt to suggest that prisoners have confidence in the complaints system and its independence, they do not on the basis of our postbag.    There are many areas of concern regarding the Prisons and Probation Ombudsman (PPO):&#xa0;&#xa0;We receive thousands of letters from prisoners every year, the majority of whom have tried to pursue the matter without success through the complaints system. We also receive frequent letters from prisoners across the estate complaining that complaint boxes on the wings are often not refilled with complaint forms for weeks and sometimes months. This is not simply anecdotal, it reflects what other organisations such as the HMCIP believe (and which we understand will form part of their response), which is that the complaints systems within prison are often wholly inadequate, lack independence, and that prisoners’ have little or no faith in the complaints system to adequately resolve their concerns. PAS notes that the MOJ offers no statistics or evidence to suggest the contrary.    Conclusion&#xa0;The premise for the consultation document is set out in the ”Ministerial Foreword”, at p.3.  It appears to be asserted that the proposals in the consultation document are necessary because the system of legal aid has “lost much of its credibility with the public”, because “[t]axpayers’ money has been used to pay for frivolous claims”, and because the “cost of the system [has] spiralled out of control”.  These assertions are unacceptably vague, not evidenced and, as argued in this response, in fact the opposite is true.&#xa0;Although evidence in support of these claims has been sought repeatedly, it is disappointing to note that the Ministry of Justice continues to fail to provide any.  &#xa0;The absence of evidence is material.  Firstly, it undermines the credibility of the consultation document and response as a whole.  Secondly, it undermines the ability of consultees to engage with the proposals.  It is settled law that, in order for a consultation to be meaningful, “sufficient reasons for particular proposals” must be provided, “to allow those consulted to give intelligent consideration and an intelligent response” (R v North and East Devon Health Authority, ex p. Coughlan [2001] QB 213, per Lord Woolf MR, as he then was, at paragraph 108).&#xa0;The absence of any evidential basis for these proposals is all the more striking because the impact of these proposals to legal aid in general, and prison law in particular, are so severe and disproportionate.  Even if we are to accept that the overall level of the proposed saving is £4 million (as set out in footnote 17, page 21 of the consultation document) this is tiny within the overall legal aid budget and criminal justice spend in totality when compared to the cost implications if these proposals go through and the complete undermining of the rule of law within the prison estate.  &#xa0;PAS remains deeply concerned that the detrimental impact of the proposed changes in terms of the impact it will have and that this far out-weighs the relative size of any proposed saving.&#xa0;27 September 2013&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;18&#xa0; Aerts v Belguim (1998) 29 EHRR 50, R (Sunder) v Secretary of State for the Home Department ([2001] EWCA Civ 1157 R v Secretary of State for the Home Department ex p Quinn [1999] Prison LR 35 McCotter v UK (1993) 15 EHRR CD 98. R (Williams) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] 1 WLR See, amongst other authorities, R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Duggan [1994] 3 All ER 277. R (Lord) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWHC 2073 (Admin)  R (P and Q) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] EWCA Civ 1151 and CF v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWHC 111(Fam)  R(CD) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWHC 1555 (Admin)  R (Munjaz) v Mersey NHS Care Trust [2006] 2 ac 148  Keenan v UK 92001) 33 EHRR 38 where a breach of article 3 was contributed to by the imposition of cellular confinement as punishment against a mentally ill prisoner.  R (Lumba) v SSHD [2012] 1 AC 245 See The effectiveness and impact of immigration detention casework A joint thematic review, Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Prisons and the Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration,  December 2012, available at http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/publications/inspectorate-reports/hmipris/thematic-reports-and-research-publications/immigration-detention-casework-2012.pdf  See Bail for Immigration Detainees’ February 2013 submission to the Ministry of Justice consultation Transforming rehabilitation: a revolution in the way in which we manage offenders 2013, available at http://www.biduk.org/154/consultation-responses-and-submissions/bid-consultation-responses-and-submissions.html.  Rather, one fully reasoned permission decision suggests that the Ombudsman is not an effective remedy in allegations relating to fairness (R (Akbar) v Secretary of State for Justice [2011] EWHC 3439 (Admin), per Wilkie J. at paragraph 11).  This decision is consistent with prior authority (Leech v Deputy Governor of Parkhurst Prison [1988] A.C. 533). If we look at annual report last year the budget was £5,496,000, a decrease of 8% on the previous year. Total spend was 5,306,634. 5,294 complaints were received, 2,667 investigations started and 2,360 were completed. So very roughly, averaged out for every complaint received it costs the PPO £1,002. For every complaint completed it is £2,248. There is of course the risk that with further increasing caseloads arriving at the ombudsman that they will take longer to deal with the complaints which obviously has a negative knock on to the prisoner. With reduced budgets, as there was last year, pressure could be made to view more cases as ineligible. Last year 10% more cases were deemed eligible. 4% more cases were started but 5% less completed. 53% were finished within their target 12 weeks compared to 63% the previous year. Last year there was no increase in complaints whereas the year before there was a 14% increase. The year before that there was an increase of 8%, when the budget was over £6 million.   

[[[The Bradley report 2009]]] http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/pdf/Bradley%20Report11.pdf and No one knows: Offenders with learning difficulties and learning disabilities, Loucks N (2007)).&#xa0;&#xa0; Including at the Ministry of Justice “roadshows” (see press coverage of the comments of Dr Elizabeth Gibby here: http://www.guardian.co.uk/law/2013/may/08/legal-aid-tendering-moj ) and by the Public Law Project, by way of a letter dated 22nd May 2013 (http://www.publiclawproject.org.uk/documents/PLP_Letter_to_MoJ_22_May_2013.pdf ).