

[[[Written evidence submitted by the Terence Higgins Trust (LAI 0042)]]]&#xa0;1. Introduction&#xa0;1.1               Terrence Higgins Trust is the UK’s largest HIV and sexual health charity, with 32 service centres across the UK. We are a campaigning and membership organisation which advocates on behalf of people living with or affected by HIV or poor sexual health.&#xa0;1.2              We provide services for people living with HIV to manage their condition and access emotional and practical support. These include one-to-one counselling, peer support groups, health trainers and information and advice covering benefits, housing, finances, employment and immigration. We also deliver community based clinical services, such as chlamydia screening and rapid HIV testing, and health promotion campaigns and initiatives which target populations most at risk of HIV and poor sexual health. &#xa0;1.3              Terrence Higgins Trust welcomes the opportunity to respond to this consultation on Legal Aid. We would urge the government to consider the long term implications of the proposed cuts and seek alternative solutions that will not have such a drastic impact on access to justice. &#xa0;2. Key recommendations &#xa0;&#xa0;3. Questions&#xa0;3.1 Terrence Higgins Trust firmly disagrees with the proposal to remove legal aid from prisoners. The treatment of prisoners should be given the same recourse to legal aid and justice as any other citizen. Removing access to legal aid and independent review will place individuals at high risk of neglect, potentially reverting precedence through case law in recent years. &#xa0;3.3 Current cases often reach court following an attempt to resolve the issue through the prison complaints system. If the prison complaints system is unable to resolve a problem there must still be access to the judicial system. Prisoners with HIV, blood borne viruses, STIs or any other health issue need to have access to legal advice and support to ensure that any mistreatment is raised and dealt with appropriately. Equally provision of access to safer sex materials is an ongoing issue in prisons and in a recent response to the Commission on Sex in Prison we have evidenced the continuing problems in prison with limited access to safer sex materials. &#xa0;3.4 Cases of prisoners requiring legal advice for health related matters are low in number but nonetheless must have recourse to legal aid. We do not believe that an internal prisons complaints system will have the robust independent structure that the legal system has and institutions such as prisons should not be excluded from the checks and balances that the legal system provides. In addition, as prison healthcare is provided by NHS England it would not be appropriate for matters to be dealt with internally within the prison system when an external organisation is responsible. The NHS should not be excluded from the law by virtue of the setting in which the service is provided. The example below explains the importance of legal aid for prisoners and the link with the health care services.&#xa0;&#xa0;Sam was a long term prisoner in a high security prison. Condoms were in theory accessible on all other wings if prisoners were prepared to line up and ask for one at a time from the nurse. However, Sam’s wing was separately medically managed from the rest of the prison, by the local Mental Health Trust. Their senior nurse decided that patients on that wing would not be supplied with condoms because he would not condone sexual conduct between what he saw as “vulnerable” prisoners. THT’s arguments that unprotected sexual activity was already happening and in itself leaving people vulnerable to HIV and other STIs did not work until Sam used legal aid to bring a case against the prison. Without legal aid, condoms would not have been made available to all prisoners and they would continue to be at risk of poor sexual health and life-threatening diseases.&#xa0;&#xa0;4) Introducing a residence test4.1 Terrence Higgins Trust strongly disagrees with the proposals to introduce a residence test. Legal Aid is a valuable resource for people in the UK to be able challenge the state and defend their rights. This residency test would isolate vulnerable individuals with a valid need to access the judicial system. For example, individuals who have been refused permanent leave to remain who have a health condition such as HIV and who would wish to challenge the decision on the basis of their ongoing health and wellbeing would no longer be able to access legal aid.4.2 The needs of asylum seekers should not be overlooked; whilst it is an improvement to apply the residency test from the date the asylum application is submitted it is still too restrictive and only applies to successful applicants. Given asylum seekers are normally unable to work it would not be representative of a fair society if they were unable to defend themselves with the relevant legal expertise. It is important to provide legal support to people when they need it. Individuals establishing a new life should have the same access to fair and equal judgment with legal support as any other resident in the UK. It is entirely unacceptable to provide Legal Aid to someone who has not lived in the UK for decades and to ignore the needs of someone living in the UK and contributing to society.  4.3 Anyone given permission to remain for a specific time period, for example until they turn18, would not be able to seek the right to remain permanently as they have not been a resident for 12 months based on the specifications and requirements of the proposed structure. Any child living with HIV who has built a life in the UK should be able to access the support that they need to challenge decisions about their ongoing residency. 4.4 From a practical perspective placing the responsibility on the solicitor to establish an individual’s residency status is also problematic. Proving legal status is often a complex issue and will require specific expertise and additional time and resource. There is a great risk that individuals could be incorrectly prohibited from legal aid if the provider is unable to gain proof. 4.5 Individuals will not always have relevant paperwork and there is a risk that discrimination of individuals due to government bodies and agencies mistakes or failure to provide paperwork. There will also be situations where vulnerable individuals may have had to leave their residence without being able to find papers and evidence of their residency status. 5. Access to topic experts5.1 Having a solicitor who specialises in the relevant area of law who is able to expertly represent the individual to achieve the best possible outcome is essential. The current proposals mean that an individual would not necessarily be able to seek out the best candidate for their case. It is in both the state’s and the individual’s best interest to be able to choose the most qualified legal aid provider. These proposals will undermine that and will risk miscarriages of justice in specialised cases. 5.2 An example of specialist knowledge would be in a case prosecuting against an individual for the transmission of HIV. These cases are rare and complex; they require expert knowledge and understanding of previous cases. There are very few legal aid providers with this expertise and access to them should be available across the country. It is essential that there are not geographical limitations. Providing an individual with a local legal aid provider would risk a miscarriage of justice. An alternative system allowing legal aid providers to register particular expertise at a local and national level would enable individuals to access the most qualified representative. 5.3 It is unreasonable to expect solicitors to be experts in all areas of law. The proposals risk wasting public funds if a case is not comprehensively made by the most appropriate solicitor, with expert knowledge. The proposed approach risks poor representation of cases and an unjust use of the legal system and its practitioners. 5.4 There is also the added risk that individuals will choose to represent themselves. This is highly likely if they do not have confidence in their assigned solicitor’s ability or trust them. For any person living with HIV disclosure is difficult and for this to happen there needs to be a relationship of trust. If an individual’s HIV status is relevant to the case and they do not trust or have confidence in the legal aid provider this will severely jeopardise their case in court. 5.5 These proposals risk creating a two tiered legal system preventing some of the most vulnerable members of society to achieve justice.&#xa0;David worked for a major supermarket chain and had done for several years. When he was diagnosed with HIV he was told he needed to go onto treatment immediately. He disclosed to his line manager, who gave him three months “gardening leave” to get used to the treatments and his diagnosis. However, at the end of the 3 months, his employer told him not to return as senior managers had decided that his HIV might deter customers from shopping there, were it publicly known. They went so far as to put this in writing. Despite this being an obvious breach of equality law, the employer fought the case all the way to the day of the tribunal and only settled with David that morning. Without legal aid, David would have been unable to pursue the case and without good legal advice he would not have known that the employer was likely to cave on the morning of the trial, having only held out that long in hopes that David would fear the publicity of a tribunal appearance more than they would.&#xa0;5.6 To allocate cases according to an arbitrary process will not provide a robust and credible legal aid system. With certain cases such as the criminalisation of HIV transmission it requires a particular set of expertise. The cases are incredibly rare and it would be far more credible to allocate them on a case by case basis to the most qualified and experienced provider, regardless of location. &#xa0;5.7 Case allocation should be a combination of provider expertise and client choice. Anything less would risk resulting in cases breaking down and miscarriages of justice and grave consequences. One such example is explained below. &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;THT was contacted by a man with HIV who, on the advice of his generalist criminal law defender, had pleaded guilty to reckless GBH by sexual transmission. On reviewing the case, it was immediately obvious to us that the requirement for scientific proof of transmission had not been met to the agreed standard. It transpired that his defence had simply asked the prosecution whether the CPS medical report was proof of transmission and they had asserted that it was (when in fact it was not, and has repeatedly been shown in other cases to be insufficient). &#xa0;Although we contacted a specialist lawyer who was willing to represent him in a request to change his plea, the judge refused leave, resulting in the defendant fleeing the country and being sentenced in absentia. The defendant later died as a result of lack of access to specialist treatment while on the run. THT also knows of at least two other cases where a defendant was allowed to belatedly change their plea after they were initially gravely misadvised by a generalist criminal solicitor provided by the police.&#xa0;&#xa0;6. Paying for permission work in judicial review cases. Do you agree with the proposal that providers should only be paid for work carried out on an application for judicial review, including a request for reconsideration of the application at a hearing, the renewal hearing, or an onward permission appeal to the Court of Appeal, if permission is granted by the Court (but that reasonable disbursements should be payable in any event)? Please give reasons. 6.1 This proposal will inevitably prompt cautious behaviour and in turn prevent applications for judicial reviews. It is essential that all individuals, groups and public bodies are equal before the law and answerable to it. Government bodies and agencies should be held accountable to the law and forced to review decisions where illogical decisions have been made; these proposals will stop this from happening. 6.2 Without guaranteed access to legal aid for judicial review it will result in reduced access only for individuals or organisations prepared to take a risk and pay for the cost of judicial review application is granted. Access to justice should not be based on the ability to pay. Such a system would ostracise the vulnerable in society and result in further neglect. 7. Civil merits test – removing legal aid for borderline cases 7.1 It is not always clear from the outset what the prospects of a case are and there are examples where whilst the prospects might be low or borderline the public interest and consequence is of high importance. To ignore these cases based on an initial judgement that they are not likely to succeed is unacceptable. This is particularly the case of those which just miss the 50 per cent cut off. &#xa0;7.2 There is a lack of clarity on how the likely success of a case will be decided. Additional evidence often comes to light through questioning that changes the expected outcome. Making a decision regarding funding prior to a hearing will inevitably prevent some individuals from achieving justice simply because they appeared unlikely to succeed.&#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;