&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted]]]

[[[ by Surrey Welfare Rights Unit.]]]Surrey Welfare Rights Unit (SWRU) is a charity and a member of Citizens Advice.  SWRU welcomes the opportunity to contribute this evidence to the Committee’s inquiry.  The Unit is a second-tier organisation that supports advisers with complex benefits issues.  It provides training, an advice line and undertakes social policy work at a local and national level.  For this inquiry SWRU consulted with over 60 local organisations.  The evidence included in this document was provided by those local organisations.  In particular, the Surrey CABx network has seen a 35% increase in rent arrears queries in Q1 of 2013 when compared to Q1 in 2012, and a 13% increase in council tax arrears queries.  &#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Changes to the age limit for the shared accommodation rate]]]Since the announcement in 2011 that the shared accommodation rate was to be extended to under 35s local advice organisations in Surrey have been concerned that the housing market does not offer sufficient provision for benefit claimants requiring accommodation of this type.  Single claimants between the ages of 25 and 35 often have children with whom they need to keep parental contact and preferably would have to come and stay with them.  This is not possible with just a single room in a shared house.  A few months prior to when the change was introduced a local Surrey CAB conducted a short survey looking at availability of single rooms in the Guildford and Blackwater Valley Broad Market Rental Areas.  Using online property search sites and local newspapers the research revealed only 6 rooms were available within current LHA rates offered by landlords who would accept benefit claimants.  In many cases accommodation was offered to “professionals only” and some adverts still stated “no DSS”.   This extremely low level of availability was the local situation before 25-35 year old claimants would also be seeking that same accommodation type.&#xa0;A CAB client in west Surrey rents a one-bedroom flat.  He is 32 years old.  His children from a previous relationship come and stay with him 3 nights per week.  His employer ceased trading in April 2013 and the client claimed Jobseekers Allowance and Housing Benefit.  After 13 weeks the single room restriction applied and the client now has a £280 rent shortfall per month.  His home is at risk and if he ends up having to rent a single room his children will not be able to stay over.  &#xa0;A CAB client in north west Surrey had been renting a one-bedroom flat for several years.  He had convictions for assault in the past and he suffered with mental health issues including paranoia.  He is 33 years old.  He is in the Support Group of Employment and Support Allowance and his DLA care component is paid at lower rate which does not exempt him from the single room rent restriction.  His renewal application for a discretionary housing payment has been turned down. &#xa0;The introduction of the social housing size criteria rules have had an unprecedented negative impact on some tenants.  Furthermore advice organisations predict that the size criteria rule will continue to affect current tenants long into the future as they run out of savings or can no longer budget for rent shortfalls from already stretched low incomes.  CABx and other advice organisations have seen the human distress caused by this rule change.  The lack of suitable alternative accommodation suggests that this policy will take several years to achieve its outcomes but in the meantime tenants are forced into rent shortfalls and increasing pressure is placed on discretionary housing payment funds.  Apart from the emotional investment that many households have put into their homes, in some cases councils have also invested thousands of pounds making adaptations to meet disabled tenants needs. &#xa0;A Surrey CAB saw a client who is 61 and has a long term mental health condition.  He has lived in his 2-bed flat since 1950’s as it was his parents’ home.  He is having to make up the shortfall in his Housing Benefit from his DLA.  &#xa0;A CAB in Surrey advised a female client who had rented her home for over 21 years.  She had raised her family there but now faced a 25% “bedroom tax” on her eligible rent.  The client is recovering from breast cancer and currently cannot contemplate moving.  There is no delay under any circumstance in applying the bedroom tax.&#xa0;A tenant in west Surrey sought advice from his local CAB about his ESA being sanctioned.  The client is now appealing the decision but whilst waiting for his hearing, which could take many months, he is surviving on hardship payments of £39 per week.  He has also received a bedroom tax decision and now has to pay £38 per month towards his rent. &#xa0;A Carer Support organisation in Surrey was contacted by a Carer who looks after her severely disabled adult daughter.  Her other adult child has left home and the Carer, who is the tenant, now has a 14% bedroom tax decision.  The home has had thousands of pounds spent by the council on adaptations and the third bedroom is used occasionally by carers to give the client respite.  A room used by a carer to stay over would not count for bedroom tax purposes if the disabled daughter was the Housing Benefit claimant but she does not have capacity.&#xa0;A CAB in north west Surrey saw a client who is in receipt of DLA and ESA.  She has received a “bedroom tax” decision which means that she now has to pay an extra £15 per week towards her rent.  She applied for a Discretionary Housing Payment with supporting evidence from her community psychiatric nurse, her social worker and her psychiatrist all stating that it would be detrimental to her health if she had to move.  She was refused the payment. &#xa0;In many cases, local Council Tax Support (CTS) schemes mean that low income residents now have to make small payments to their local Councils where previously Council Tax Benefit would have met that liability in full.  This means that the full impact of the introduction of CTS has probably not yet happened.  The concern is that a single month’s default can swiftly escalate to court action.  It is likely that arrears building up now will move to court proceedings over the next months.  Across Surrey we have 11 different borough and district based schemes ranging from the default scheme, which protects low income households to the same level as Council Tax Benefit, to one CTS that now only provides maximum support of 70%.  For the future, council tax limits will be set locally and in many cases will exceed the 1% uprating that means-tested benefit claimants will experience in future years.  It is highly likely that CTS schemes will provide less and less financial support unless central Government provides additional funding for those schemes.  Without additional support for low income families, there will be significant levels of default and court proceedings as well as declining council tax collection rates at a local level.  &#xa0;A CAB in west Surrey saw three clients in one week who had received summons for non- payment of Council Tax.  The Council still had not processed applications to the CTS hardship fund and had to suspend the court action when hardship funds were awarded.  One client had post-natal depression and had made a suicide attempt shortly before receiving her summons.&#xa0;A Surrey CAB was contacted by a single parent in receipt of Income Support.  She had been notified by her local council that she now had to pay 20% council tax, £15.17 per month.  Her son’s father had disappeared and she was no longer receiving any maintenance for him.  She had re-done her budget many times but her income had not changed and she did not know how she was going to pay this new significant bill each month.  &#xa0;One Surrey council provides additional CTS to residents who are in receipt of a severe or enhanced disability premium.  A CAB client in his 40’s sought advice on how to cope now he had to pay £160 council tax annually.  He has schizophrenia and is in receipt of Severe Disablement Allowance.  His lower rate DLA does not provide him with one of these premiums.  27 September 2013&#xa0;