&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Robin ]]]

[[[Gershon]]]I am a full time carer for my wife Kerry Gershon, recipients of Housing Benefit for our two-bedroom adapted bungalow, a local authority property under New Forest District Council.I am writing this submission in order to give a personal account of how the under-occupancy penalty has very real emotional and financial costs to the lives of the most vulnerable people in society. The apparent ignorance of ministers involved in the implementation of the policy about the effects it has on those people needs to be addressed, and I hope in making this personal submission that I can offer a broader view of the often complex cases of those affected.Submission covers - Personal Circumstances prior to our receipt of Housing BenefitDiscussion of application of ‘bedroom tax’ to our caseOutline of disproportionate effects of policy on disabled householdsDiscussion about full-time familial carers offering savings to ‘benefit bill’The demoralizing, dehumanizing effect of being called names by the DWP. 1. My wife and I live in local authority owned social housing. I care full time for my wife who has Secondary Progressive Multiple Sclerosis. It’s the kind of MS where you get worse, and then stabilise, and then get worse again, rather than the kind where you vary between being worse and better.2. Prior to requiring social housing, my wife and I both worked - fervently! We were both fortunate enough to enjoy full time employment, and earn very decent wages, and happily paid a lot of money in tax and national insurance, never with any reservations about it being redistributed to people less fortunate than ourselves. We even managed, beside our mortgage, cars, holidays and contributions to the consumer economy to accrue some savings, but there came a point where my wife’s illness worsened, and this eventually meant that she could no longer work, When I chose to look after her instead of work full time, It became increasingly evident we could no longer afford to stay in a home of our own.3. Like all social housing tenants, whether disabled or not, we were housed based on our needs. It’s certain that needs can change over time so that people sometimes require smaller properties, but as in the case of many disabled people, we’ve had some extensive adaptations made to our two-bedroom property to allow my wife some form of independence. Some of these adaptations were funded by a disabled facilities grant, but the majority of the money came from our ever decreasing savings, as our needs meant that we were unable to wait for the amount of time it would have taken to arrange a grant to provide a wetroom. When works funded by a grant did take place to allow the practical use of an electric wheelchair in the property, we happily provided some of the money to assist with these refurbishments. We did not blink at paying to install our own kitchen, as it seemed we had been fortunate enough to find a property that while modest in size, suited our space needs for wheelchairs, a hoist, and the other equipment that we need to manage care for my wife.4. My wife cannot work. She’d love to work but her troubling, painful and increasingly difficult physical condition means that she is unable to do so. She can’t transfer independently, feed herself or perform any physical task due to weakness, pain and severe shaking, I provide 24 hour a day, 7 day a week care for the glamorous remuneration of £58.45 per week in Carer’s Allowance, for which I’m very grateful. We are also in receipt of some funds that allow us to employ a Carer at times most helpful to us thanks to a scheme of ‘personal budgets’. This means that instead of getting staff from a care agency we act as employer (including making tax and national insurance contributions!) for people we can choose for ourselves for 14 hours of care per week. This time allows me to get other stuff done around the home, or to visit my dying father safe in the knowledge that there is somebody here overnight to care for my wife. Increasingly as my wife’s condition worsens I’m spending some of those hours helping the carers with lifting and handling and other tasks. I’ve certainly considered the suggestion that I could get a job to pay for the bedroom tax, but the amount of money it costs to replace me around the home with the sort of permanent care my wife needs would certainly mean an increased cost to the welfare system, not a reduced one.5. The bedroom tax itself is flawed from a policy point of view - it focuses on victimising disabled people, it is increasingly looking like it will cost more money to enforce and administer than it is ever likely to save, and it is in any case unworkable due to the unavailability of suitably sized housing to accommodate all the people who are allegedly ‘under-occupying’ their properties. There is already a £2bn cost associated with keeping people requiring social housing in B&amp;Bs, hotels and hostels in cases where suitable accommodation cannot be found, and moving people, particularly disabled people, out of homes because they cannot afford to pay the bedroom tax will only lead to this cost increasing.6. In the final analysis, we were able to apply for exemption from the under-occupancy penalty, by petitioning our local authority with a case that we receive regular overnight care. The thought that there must be many other vulnerable disabled people affected by this policy, who might not have the luxury of a few hours of care organized from ‘direct payment’ funds, Is greatly concerning.7. Part of the work I do for my wife is to keep her morale up, to divert her from the inevitability of her condition, whether through helping her laugh through her pain and discomfort, or to focus on positive stuff. As her memory has just begun to start failing her in small places, and the continuing rhetoric of the welfare reforms is starting to make her feel like she no longer has value as a person, that part of my ‘work’ gets harder and harder to do. We’re a long way from desperate yet, but even I, a cheery soul by nature, am struggling to see any compassion for the vulnerable in the automated letters being generated by the rent arrears system.8. So, reform of housing policy has only really served to stop us feeling as if we are involved in a team effort to provide permanent care for my wife – as well as NHS cuts meaning that we have lost a specialist MS Occupational Therapist, we now seem to have an adversarial relationship with our Local Authority, who took only two weeks after the 1st April implementation of the under-occupancy penalty to write letters detailing the amount of our debt, and the legal measures that would be taken against us in order to retrieve it. Eventually, these letters became threats of eviction, and both my wife and I have been left emotionally battered by the experience. 9. It’s a difficult thing to provide savings to the state, in the form of the full time care that I do for my wife, and also to be painted in the broader media as some type of skiver or scrounger, in the rhetoric released to the press by the DWP. The assertion that ‘hard working taxpayers’ are somehow subsidizing a luxury lifestyle for us Is offensive, inaccurate, and at its core leads to only one natural conclusion – that caring for vulnerable people should not be done because it costs money. From feeling like part of a team made of up of local authority resources, care advisors, myself, medical professionals and the carers we fund from direct payments, I feel as if we’ve become an object of national derision, and while I continue to work at all hours of the day, and frequently all hours of the night in the provision of care for my wife, it’s a task that now seems to hold no value at all in the minds of the people in charge of the Department for Work and Pensions. This undermining of my role and purpose has meant that I’ve had to take the decision to make the difficult transition into some therapy for myself, as my shame about being a national burden to the taxpayer is now having a profoundly negative effect on our ability to act as members of our communi.10. My only recommendation to the committee, beyond bringing to your attention the urgent need for a cessation of the under-occupancy penalty regulations, is to put in place a framework that allows Local Authorities to provide exemptions for families containing disabled people. At the present time, only disabled adults with regular overnight care are exempt, and all others must rely on what appear to be, despite continued additions by the department to the fund, inadequate Discretionary Housing Payments. DHPs are also by their very nature unsuitable for protecting these most vulnerable groups of people, as their application is not governed by any central guidance, and will therefore be applied differently by different Local Authorities.11. Already there have been two legal rulings calling on the DWP to protect, by exemption, disabled children from having to share bedrooms under the terms of their guidance. The Gorry vs. DWP case, resolved in March 2012, led to these exemptions being required of the department, and they have not yet been implemented at the date of this letter – the latter part of September 2013. Lord Justice Laws, in a later High Court case decided 30th July, highlighted that it was unacceptable the legal requirement to provide these exemptions had not yet been implemented, and indeed was reassured by DWP steps to do so were imminent.The Department is not doing enough to protect the most vulnerable, and in the pursuit of the policy on under-occupation, is actually doing the most vulnerable people a great deal of harm.27 September 2013&#xa0;