&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Written ]]]

[[[Evidence submitted by Mary Miller (Partner) and Ian Bacon (Partner) of The ]]]

[[[Blewburton]]]

[[[ Partnership – energy and sustainability consultants]]]The Housing Standards Review Consultation appears to start from the position that the Code for Sustainable Homes (Code)is to be wound down, and that planning authorities, many of which have welcomed the Code as a tool to improve the sustainability of new developments within their area, will no longer be able to set such requirements at a local level.  This substantial departure from current practice and policy appears to have been decided upon without any consultation process.We find this unacceptable, counter to the localism agenda and undemocratic. In addition, it introduces another level of uncertainty and inconsistency in the policy arena which is very unhelpful to the house-building industry.  This sort of step undermines confidence in all Government measures, past, present and future that concern house building.Furthermore we do not believe that the removal of the Code and the ability for local authorities to use it will have any material effect on the speed at which new homes will be built.  Our reasons for this are set out below.1/ The Code has delivered real tangible improvements in the building of sustainable and quality housing.  Specifics include:This is not confined to better design and building practices, but has also driven the supply chain to innovate and enhance its products.  It is innovation such as this that will give these companies market edge moving into the future and allow a positive impact on the overall economy.2/ Many local authorities have developed policies to ensure that development within their jurisdiction meets exacting sustainability standards so that new development reflects best practice and meets the needs of the future in the best way possible within the constraints of viability.  Nevertheless, sustainability covers a wide range of issues and no planning department has the full range of expertise within their team to be able to assess plans for compliance.  The Code offers a ‘one stop’ shop for the key sustainability issues with a fully developed assessment and monitoring system that is welcomed by many councils as a solution to this problem.  It has proved flexible and efficient and much more effective, consistent and reassuring than systems devised within the individual authorities.  To remove it will either remove the ability for councils to determine the levels of sustainability for new development within their own area, or will put them in the position of having to develop, implement and enforce their own systems leading to high levels of inconsistency and uncertainty.Higher levels of uncertainly and inconsistency will lead to further delays in the planning process not fewer.3/ The Code already includes measures that have recently been put forward as good ideas – e.g. external storage for waste bins.  This was an issue brought to the fore by Eric Pickles in the summer, indeed those not involved in the industry could have been forgiven for thinking that it was an innovation all his own, when in fact it has been a Code issue since its inception!  Other examples include; storage for cycles and the provision of private external space.4/ Developers that are among the better practitioners have already engaged with the Code; they have invested time and money and expertise in developing compliance strategies to maintain their advantage in the market – as such these developers – who range in size from small to large scale are well placed to continue with increasingly stringent Code levels in an efficient and seamless manner.  Those developers who have not engaged with the process are those that will experience high costs of compliance.  Removing the Code will merely penalise good practitioners in favour of poor ones.5/ The Code clearly could be improved and streamlined – some categories need to be modified and others removed – there is also scope for new items to be included.  It would be better to evolve it than throw it out in favour of an incoherent set of ‘standards’ to be administered by already overstretched Development Control and Building Control departments – whose expertise is already tested under their current  range of work.6/ Costs of Code compliance presented in the Consultation paper have been exaggerated and do not reflect the dramatic reductions in compliance costs that have been achieved over recent years.7/ The removal of the Code will do nothing to accelerate the rate of house building.8/ The current problem we have is in reconciling the need for high standards with respect to sustainability and energy conservation, while not slowing down the pace of new build.  The solution is to improve the performance and efficiency of instruments like the Code not remove it.9/ The performance gap is a clear issue that should be addressed and one that the Code has already made significant progress with by having a team of assessors verifying compliance with developer’s statements and through on-site inspection.  There is an opportunity for the Code to enhance this role – in areas like thermal performance, etc.10/ It is recognised that, in terms of building sustainable homes, UK housing is still a long way behind European counterparts in Germany, Holland, Scandinavia etc.  Great strides have been made since the initial implementation of EcoHomes and its evolution into the Code.  To now allow this momentum to stall, will be to put the issue of sustainability in housing on hold and mean that we will continue to not build the houses that the public deserve and desire.  Developers we have spoken with, from the top ten house building companies, down to single one off builders are clear that they will not do anything beyond minimum standards with regards to energy and sustainability should the Code be removed, but, they also report that the Code has no impact on the speed with which they gain planning permission, the pace of build or their ability to build houses for profit.We would urge the inquiry to recommend that the Code for Sustainable Homes is retained but is subject to a rigorous overhaul.  Let’s not throw the baby out with the bathwater!!.27 September 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;