

[[[Written evidence submitted by Mind (LAI 0074)]]]Introduction Mind responded to the government’s consultation on Transforming Legal Aid.  We remain deeply concerned about the impact of the government’s current proposals upon people who experience mental health problems, one of the most vulnerable groups in society, who experience high levels of discrimination and some of whom may be at risk of compulsory detention and treatment under the Mental Health Act 1983 if they do not receive community care and support they need. We consider that these proposals will have a disproportionate effect upon our beneficiaries as they include people who do not have the resources or capacity to act as litigants in person.  Our beneficiaries include people who are more likely to be affected by decisions of the state as they may require health or social care services or at times may rely on welfare benefits.  It is contrary to human rights and the UN Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities to limit the ability of a class of people accessing legal assistance to secure the care they need for their mental health conditions and to challenge the discrimination and mistreatment they experience.

[[[Prison Law scope cuts]]]Restrictions in legal aid will mean that prisoners can no longer obtain legal advice in relation to matters such as discrimination, visiting, transfers, and access to healthcare and to community care for rehabilitation.It is universally accepted that prisoners have a higher rate of mental health problems and that detention itself has an adverse effect on mental health. They are also at increased risk of suicide.Mind does not advise on prison law but the Mind Legal Advice line receives letters from prisoners who tell us that they are not able to access the care and treatment they consider they need. They write to Mind for advice because they are distressed by the way they are being treated in prison and they consider this may be because of the symptoms they exhibit arising from their mental health conditions.We consider that this proposal will put vulnerable prisoners, including those with mental health problems, fluctuating capacity or cognitive disabilities, at a serious disadvantage as they will not be able to enforce their rights, contrary to the provisions of the Equality Act 2010, Article 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Article 12 and 13 UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.Our other major concern is that the proposals will still reduce availability of specialist prison law advice as the scope of prison law has been narrowed, although we understand that the government has agreed that the specialist category of prison law may remain. Prisoners with mental health problems can have complex needs and do require specialist advice.  &#xa0;

[[[Introduction of a residence test]]]While the government’s concession in relation to detention cases is to be welcomed, Mind considers that this proposal still compromises the principle of equality before the law. We also note that the Ministry of Justice is unable to quantify the savings that this change would result in and so it is not possible to assess the justification for this proposal.Mind is very concerned that people who lack capacity to litigate or to make decisions about their care, treatment and residence, or have fluctuating capacity or cognitive disabilities, remain subject to this test. Mind’s experience is that people may require legal representation to gain access to the community care services and accommodation they need to stay well. The mental healthcare system is coercive and if a person deteriorates for want of adequate care in the community then they are at risk of being taken to a place of safety by police and this may mean being confined to a police station for up to 72 hours (section 136 Mental Health Act 1983). They may also be detained in hospital and subject to compulsory treatment under Mental Health Act 1983 (e.g. s.2 and 3 Mental Health Act 1983). People who failed to meet the test would have no redress for actions for unlawful detention and tortious claims arising from unlawful use of restraint and assault.Mind, together with other members of PLINGO (Public Lawyers in Non-governmental organisations) was advised by Michael Fordham QC, Ben Jaffey and Ravi Mehta that this proposal is unlawful and that opinion was forwarded to the Ministry of Justice with our initial response. &#xa0;

[[[Proposal that providers of legal services in applications for judicial review against public bodies should only be paid for work done on the case if the Court grants permission to proceed]]].Mind does not consider that there is evidence to justify this proposal which will deprive vulnerable people of an opportunity to hold public authorities to account. We are persuaded by the research and analysis that Public Law Project prepared in relation to judicial review . A legally aided claimant has to exhaust other remedies before being granted legal aid and has to satisfy the Legal Aid Agency of the merits of their claim so there is already a stringent filtering process operated in relation to legal aid being granted for judicial review for any claimant.Judicial review is the chief means by which the executive and public bodies are held to account. People with mental health problems or cognitive disabilities are one group in society whose lives are greatly affected by decisions made by public bodies and for them this remedy is particularly important. Correspondingly this section of society includes people least able to litigate in person or even understand their rights.Mind is aware that it is often only with the assistance of a lawyer who issues judicial review proceedings that a person with a mental health condition gains access to the healthcare services in hospital or the health, housing or social care that they need in the community. We are concerned that these proposals:&#xa0;It will therefore disproportionately affect people with mental health problems as their needs for community care, hospital treatment, specialist care packages, accommodation and support means that they are more reliant on public body decision-making. Also, they are less able to act as litigants in person and are more often excluded or discriminated against in decision making. Complaints procedures do not offer a solution to a person who needs an urgent remedy such as access to a vital community care service, appropriate accommodation or essential healthcare treatment. 

[[[Removal of borderline merits test criterion.]]]&#xa0;We disagree with the reasoning in this proposal. As the Ministry of Justice accept ‘ borderline’ cases are often high priority cases which involve holding the state to account or public interest cases. While these are likely by definition to be cases where it is harder to assess the prospects of success, it is important that they are brought. One example would be disability discrimination claims that raise new questions of law that affect others with the same or similar disabilities. &#xa0;27 September 20134&#xa0; See the statistics from The Rt Hon Lord Bradley, The Department for Health The Bradley Report : Lord Bradley’s review of people with mental health problems or learning disabilities in the criminal justice system April 2009 in our initial response.   Mind ‘s Information Unit estimates   on current figures for the prison population in December 2012 the suicide rate is 2 per 1000 prisoners (.22%) while the rate for England in the general population is 0.01% .The figures for 2012 are on the government website. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/prison-population-2012 &#xa0;&#xa0; Annexe B: Response to consultation  p87 para 125.https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/transforming-legal-aid-next-steps