&#xa0;&#xa0;Written evidence  from Action on Hearing Loss (TIC 112)&#xa0;I am writing regarding the Transport Committee's current inquiry into passenger transport in isolated communities. As you may recall, earlier this year I appeared before you to give oral evidence on the experiences of people with hearing loss as part of your inquiry into access to transport for people with disabilities. A number of the points that I raised during that session are also applicable to the committee's current inquiry into passenger transport in isolated communities and this letter is intended to highlight and expand on the issues that are particularly pertinent.&#xa0;Action on Hearing Loss is the UK's largest membership charity supporting people who are deaf or hard of hearing. We're experts in providing support for people with hearing loss and tinnitus and provide day-to-day care for people who are deaf and have additional needs. There are ten million people in the UK who are deaf or hard of hearing — one in six of the population.&#xa0;People with hearing loss often face information and communication challenges when travelling by public transport, challenges which may be exacerbated in isolated communities. Whilst people with hearing loss will plan and approach their journey in the same way as any other passenger, challenges occur when things change during that journey and when changes are not communicated accurately, immediately and visually.&#xa0;A minor change, such as a platform alteration or a delayed connection, can very quickly become a major situation for someone with hearing loss left unaware of the situation and unable to adapt to it. In instances where transport provision is already limited, not being able to access accurate information about journey alterations can be particularly problematic. Real-time visual information displays (on trains, buses and throughout stations) are invaluable for people with hearing loss, but we know that the use of these systems varies widely across the transport network. A lack of real-time visual information at rural bus stops, for example, can be a real hindrance to someone with hearing loss setting out on a journey with confidence.For buses and coaches, the Public Service Vehicles Accessibility Regulations do not currently include a requirement for audio-visual information systems. As such, some communities, including those in rural and isolated locations, do not have consistent access to audio-visual systems on local bus services to convey travel details and information about any unscheduled journey changes. The `iBus' system currently in operation on all London buses represents a model of good practice for this type of system.&#xa0;Your inquiry is also looking at demand responsive transport services. Whilst these may provide an alternative travel option in isolated communities, these are not necessarily accessible for people with hearing loss. Demand responsive services should offer a range of contact methods such as through SMS, email, Text Relay and textphone and should ensure deaf awareness training is available for all drivers and booking staff. They must also be able to alert passengers with hearing loss to any changes in pick-up or journey information.&#xa0;I hope that these comments are of use to the Committee. We would be happy to provide you with further detail on any of these points if that would be beneficial.&#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;