                            &#xa0;

[[[Submission by ]]]

[[[t]]]

[[[he Royal Society for the Protection of Birds ]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;Section 1: Fairness&#xa0;&#xa0;1.1 Decisions on CAP implementation are still to be finalised across the UK countries however, there is no evidence to suggest that an approach which sought to maximise environmental delivery would put English farmers at a competitive disadvantage to their regional or continental counterparts. In fact, the evidence we have gathered highlights the added value that environmental measures can bring for farm competiveness and local economies. Evidence based policy making and an intervention logic based on effectiveness, market failure and value for public money (all of which reflect principles which guided the Government through CAP reform negotiations) should logically lead to decisions to: &#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Transfer of funds between the Pillars]]]&#xa0;1.2 It is important to recognise that the distribution of Pillar 1 payments has, and will continue to vary enormously across the EU. Whilst some stakeholders and decision makers claim that the CAP’s primary purpose is to ensure a “level playing field” for farmers, the reality is that the distribution of support across EU Member States in far from equal. Undistorted competition is a valid objective, however the way Pillar 1 payments are distributed results in widely different per hectare payments rates, both within the UK (including within England itself) and beyond. It is therefore an illusion that the CAP creates a level playing field and it is within this context that English farmers have operated, and many very successfully, for many years.&#xa0;1.3 There is significant debate over what contribution Pillar 1 payments make to farmers’ competiveness. Whilst there is limited agreement on how to define and measure ‘competiveness’ precisely (OECD, 2010), many studies focus on productivity as a key determinant i.e. how efficiently inputs are converted into outputs. The literature generally finds mixed effects, although recent research has demonstrated that the impact of CAP subsidies on farm productivity in the EU-15 countries post-2005 has been small. This should not come as a surprise. The Treasury has identified five drivers that are of particular importance for improving productivity: physical capital (investment); human capital (skills); innovation and technological progress; competition; and enterprise. Yet Pillar 1 payments are not distributed in a way which would support any of these. &#xa0;1.4 Transferring funding to Pillar 2 rather than retaining it within Pillar 1 can help enhance competitiveness in a variety of ways. Firstly, several (if not all) of the ‘productivity drivers’ identified above can be targeted (and have been in the 2007-13 RDPE) through Pillar 2 measures such as knowledge transfer and the dispersal of best practice, vocational training, on farm diversification and the development of new market opportunities. &#xa0;1.5 These measures were not the primary focus of the 2007-13 RDPE because Defra took the appropriate decision that these types of activities should be largely market driven. Defra instead prioritised environmental Public Goods delivery, including biodiversity, historic environment and landscape character, through agri-environment schemes. Given the clear market failure to reward the provision of environmental Public Goods, and the continued and significant challenges facing the natural environment (as outlined in the “State of Nature” report),  the RSPB continues to strongly support such a focus&#xa0;1.6 It must be noted that the production of agricultural goods is highly dependent on the services provided by natural ecosystems and therefore, there is real potential for Pillar 2 schemes, particularly agri-environment schemes, to enhance a range of ecosystem services of benefit to agricultural production, and in turn agricultural productivity and competiveness. &#xa0;1.7 Agri-environment schemes, in addition to their proven value for the natural environment (including preventing the localised extinction of species such as the cirl bunting and stone curlew) also have wider socio-economic benefits. A report by CCRI  identified that every £1 of Environmental Stewardship money generates a total output in the local economy of £1.42. &#xa0;1.8 The Natural Capital Committee also identified the wider benefits of targeting CAP support towards the environment: “Improving the allocation of resources by redirecting this [direct income support] expenditure towards incentivising farmers to produce the things that the market will not provide on its own – the public and environmental goods – could increase wellbeing and potentially have knock-on impacts for the wider economy.&#xa0;1.9 A report co-authored by IEEP identified that transfers away from Pillar 1 would have a minimal impact on farm income and a negligible influence on agricultural commodity production and on the viability of farm businesses. 1.10 Therefore, transferring the maximum amount possible (15%) from Pillar 1 into Pillar 2, and prioritising environmental Public Goods delivery through RDPE measures works for, and not against, English farmers’ competiveness.&#xa0;1.11 Maximum transfers into Pillar 2 are also important to help rebalance the UK’s disproportionately low Pillar 2 allocation. Despite assurances from the European Commission that CAP allocations for 2014-2020 would be, at least in part, based on objective criteria and as such result in an improved Pillar II allocation for the UK, this failed to materialise. For 2014-2020, the UK has been allocated €2.293bn for Pillar 2, compared to €22.148bn for Pillar 1. This equates to 90.6% for Pillar 1 and just 9.4% for Pillar 2. The average EU allocation for Pillar 2 is 24%.  &#xa0;1.12 The UK’s total Pillar 2 budget for 2014-2020 has also been reduced and is 5.5% less than for 2007-13 (Pillar 1 received just a 2.5% cut).  However, given that Pillar II expenditure increased year on year in England during 2007-2013, and included modulation, it is worth analysing what the new Pillar 2 budget could mean for annual spend. Without modulation, annual Pillar 2 spend in England would be 16% less in 2014 than in 2013. By 2020 it would be 27% less (see Graphic below).&#xa0;1.13 Perversely, cuts to the Pillar 2 budget (and the UK’s allocation within that) have taken place when the need for increased investment in the environment is clear and where there are few other mechanisms beyond Pillar 2 schemes to fund environmental commitments. According to a report produced by the UK’s statutory conservation, countryside and environment agencies, the estimated cost of meeting publicly defined environmental objectives in the UK is just under £2bn a year, but could vary from £1bn to £3bn. The funding needed to meet the UK’s Biodiversity Action Plan targets alone was estimated at £837 million per year. The UK BAP has been succeeded by country strategies within the UK Biodiversity Framework but the aspirations contained within them, of halting biodiversity loss by 2020 and strengthening ecosystem services, are likely to equal or even exceed the scale of the BAP targets, equating to an annual economic scale of need that is more in line with the UK’s entire Pillar 2 allocation, rather than its annual budget.&#xa0;1.14 In addition, existing Pillar 2 commitments strongly support the case for maximum modulation. In England alone, the financial commitment of existing agri-environment agreements over the lifetime of the 2014-2020 CAP is £1.9bn. When Defra’s commitments for agreements offered in 2014 are included, this is likely to bring the total to between £2.1 and £2.2 billion. If the UK’s Pillar 2 allocation is split between the four UK countries along similar lines to previous CAP rounds (where England received around 60% after compulsory modulation had been applied), England’s Pillar 2 allocation will be just £1.38bn.&#xa0;1.15 England’s share of the UK’s Pillar 1 allocation has not yet been agreed but based on previous divisions this is expected to be around 65%. Applying 15% modulation would generate an additional £1.74bn for Pillar 2 and would ensure that Pillar 2 expenditure remained broadly comparable to 2007-13. It would also bring England’s Pillar 2 expenditure up to the EU average of 24%.&#xa0;1.16 15% modulation would ensure existing commitments are honoured and new agreements can be offered during 2014-2020. This is vital to ensure England’s most progressive farmers can continue to be supported through schemes which deliver clear environmental and wider benefits.&#xa0;

[[[New Environmental Land Management Schemes (NELMS)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]1.17 There is good evidence that prioritising biodiversity and the wider environment will benefit both the environment and the economic vitality of farming and rural areas. As such, the RSPB fully supports the continued prioritisation of agri-environment schemes, via NELMS, in the new RDPE&#xa0;1.18 The RSPB welcomes Defra’s intention to make NELMS more targeted, focused and ambitious relative to Environmental Stewardship. This is fully in keeping with the leadership role England has played in the development of agri-environment schemes over the last 25 years and is sensible given the shifting baseline offered by new greening requirements. This approach to implementation will also afford a competitive advantage to the most environmentally progressive farmers, including those who have already embraced agri-environment schemes as an integral part of their farm businesses. &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;2.1 In the UK, High Nature Value (HNV) farming systems and activities - those which make a particularly high contribution to the provision of environmental public goods - are associated with low-intensity and low/no input mixed beef/sheep livestock systems, largely found in upland farming and crofting communities, including many which are tenanted. &#xa0;2.2 Upland landscapes can, when appropriately managed, provide a range of vital goods and services including clean drinking water, climate regulation, access and recreation, as well as provisioning services such as food, fibre and timber production. Many of the land managers on whom our priority species and habitats depend are tenant farmers and commoners.&#xa0;2.3 Despite the benefits many such systems deliver, maintaining, or indeed even reaching, economic profitability remains a challenge due to a range of factors, including market access difficulties, competition from more intensive production systems, poor prices from supply chain, and the failure of the CAP and wider public policy to adequately reward environmental public good delivery. We also recognise that, while land owner/tenant relationships vary greatly, there can be real issues with tenants not being rewarded for positive changes in land management because they do not receive the associated additional income. &#xa0;2.4 Due to these issues, the Pillar 1 income support payments that upland farmers receive often represent a significant proportion of their overall income, sometimes even subsidising unprofitable livestock production. There is therefore a clear argument for better rewarding those upland farmers whose systems of extensive management deliver environmental benefits. &#xa0;2.5 Pillar 2 schemes, particularly agri-environment, play an important role in tackling the failure of the market to reward environmental Public Goods delivery and represent an extremely important income stream for many upland farmers. However, it is clear that economic sustainability is still a long way off for many such farmers, not least because Pillar 2 support is based upon ‘income foregone’. For tenant farmers who are positively managing their land through an agri-environment scheme, it is important that steps are taken to ensure landlords are not able to appropriate the associated funding through artificially inflated rents.&#xa0;2.6 The RSPB is very open to changes in CAP Pillar 1 payment approaches that would see an uplift in financial support to upland farmers. The challenge is to make this sufficiently targeted to deliver the required economic, social and environmental outcomes. To ensure greater value for public money and the continued ability of farmers to secure the environmental and cultural heritage of the uplands, and ecosystem services, we would support an uplift targeted towards the continued delivery of these environmental goods. What is needed is a package of support measures (from both Pillar 1 and 2), targeted at HNV farms, to reward the exceptional public benefits they provide.  Payments to farmers in Less Favoured Areas have not always been successful in reaching the most disadvantaged farmers and those delivering most public goods.  For example, the current Less Favoured Area Support Scheme (LFASS) in Scotland results in higher payments going to more productive, less disadvantaged areas in the LFA , rather than being targeted at the most vulnerable farming areas. Defra should be commissioning research to fully understand the environmental and financial implications of such a shift in payments before any decisions are taken. &#xa0;2.7 The scope for attaching environmental safeguards to Pillar 1 payments remains limited and the tools that are available are fairly blunt. However there is potential to secure them within the bounds of the final CAP deal. If Defra opted to implement greening through a National Certification Scheme (NCS) applicable to all farmers, it would provide the scope to include land management options that protected and enhanced upland landscapes.Given that many upland areas remain in unfavourable condition due to inappropriate grazing, it is vitally important that Defra develop and adequately enforce cross compliance requirements to secure a basic level of good environmental management of upland pastures.&#xa0;&#xa0;Bureaucracy&#xa0;&#xa0;3.1 The reformed CAP is far from simple. In fact, the Commission’s muddled proposals and a co-decision process which added further complexity whilst watering down environmental requirements produced an unwieldy and, in parts, incoherent policy. Robust and cost-effective systems and processes for delivery will be critical to enhancing value for money for taxpayers.&#xa0;3.2 The challenge for the UK’s implementing authorities will be to implement the new CAP framework so that it adequately supports and drives farmers and land mangers to address long standing environment problems. For complex environmental challenges complex responses are often required however this does not mean that the interface with farmers and land managers has to be complicated or unnecessarily bureaucratic. Indeed we would support a system which is as user-friendly as possible. But it is vital to recognise that in order to secure effectiveness in outcomes, intelligently designed and evidence based systems of delivery will be vital. &#xa0;3.3 Experienced and knowledgeable advisers are also key to successful systems of delivery. Good advisers do not just provide technical advice, they are key to getting farmers to own the aims of their agreement and they make a huge difference to environmental outcomes. Such face to face advice has been instrumental in securing significant conservation gains from Higher Level Stewardship and is highly valued by agreement holders. It is therefore extremely important that an adequate field force of well trained conservation experts provide English farmers and land managers with the advice and support they need to implement NELMS properly. Given that the Defra family will be subject to budgetary cuts of 30%, it is vital that these do not impact the ability of Natural England advisors to provide expert advice through the lifetime of NELMS agreements. This should not be viewed as a ‘cost’ but rather a key component of securing maximum benefit from NELMS.&#xa0;3.4 For Pillar 1 implementation, improved environmental delivery and a reduction in unneccessary bureaucracy could be secured a National Certification Scheme (NCS) for greening which covered all farming systems (see section 5).&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;4.1 Many farming systems which are particularly beneficial for biodiversity and other environmental public goods are characterised by very low stocking rates. In a recent analysis by Scottish Natural Heritage on the impacts of varying stocking densities, it was found that 116 Scottish farming businesses would fail to meet even the lowest stocking density of 0.02 LU p/ha, despite still actively farming their land. The highest number of affected farm business were located in the North West ‘highlands and islands’ of Scotland, which correlates with the highest density of HNV systems in the UK. &#xa0;4.2 Comparable analysis has not yet been undertaken in England but Defra’s approach must ensure that the criteria are not set at a level which would exclude very extensive livestock producers – many of which would be found in the English uplands.&#xa0;Greening&#xa0;&#xa0;5.1 Evidence shows that CAP payments are not required to maintain food production. The ‘Scenar’ study highlighted that food production in the EU would reduce by no more than 0.25% in the absence of direct payments. Therefore any argument that direct payments contribute to EU and global food security by underpinning farming is incorrect.&#xa0;5.2 Where the CAP does have a clear role is to support farmers to produce food and other commodities in a sustainable way, protect the natural resource base upon which production relies, and to adequately reward the provision of environmental public goods where the market fails to do so.&#xa0;5.3 We would have strongly preferred for this to be pursued through further transfers of funds into Pillar 2. However Pillar 1 greening will be the principle means to raise the environmental baseline across wider farmland. The greening payment will represent approximately £495 million in England each year alone and whilst decisions in CAP negotiations significantly watered down the options available, greening does have the potential to buy significant environmental delivery if designed and implemented as well as it can be. Greening’s implementation will vary across the UK countries, but there are certain principles that should be adhered to:&#xa0;5.4 We believe that the best way to implement greening in England is via a National Certification Scheme (NCS), designed by Defra and delivered alongside agri-environment. One of the criticisms levelled at the Commission’s core greening requirements is that a ‘one size fits all’ approach makes little sense when so many different systems exist across the EU. By adopting a NCS approach, Defra would avoid this problem by choosing the most effective measures for England’s farming systems and environmental challenges. Existing certification schemes and assurance standards should not be considered due to the risks they pose in terms of compliance and associated disallowance. &#xa0;5.5 Some stakeholders have argued that a NCS would be ‘gold-plating’ the EU’s greening requirements. However, we reject this phrase when applied to Pillar 1 greening. The greening payment is exactly that, a payment, and not a regulatory requirement and in this instance, Defra’s obligation is not to farmers, but to taxpayers by ensuring value for money through clear environmental effectiveness. &#xa0;5.6 The European Council paper on the simplification of the CAP, to which the UK was a signatory, clearly states that “Any increased cost or complexity to specific measures can only be justified where the benefits outweigh the costs” and that, “An acceptable justification for increased cost might include better targeting of funding towards the provision of public goods...” We feel that introducing a meaningful and effective approach to Pillar 1 greening meets both these criteria.&#xa0;5.7 Given the range of exemptions available for core greening measures, varying thresholds and uneven geographical application, a NCS has the potential to simplify greening and make it fairer to English farmers, as it would require all Pillar 1 payment beneficiaries  to undertake greening measures. Under the Commission’s measures, significant areas of the country would effectively be exempt from greening beyond retaining most of their permanent pasture, effectively putting arable systems at a disadvantage.&#xa0;5.8 The greening payment should be viewed in the same way as Pillar 2 agri-environment schemes are: as the means to ‘buy’ environmental public goods from farmers and land managers. Whilst the Pillar 1 payments are more restrictive than Pillar 2, they can be used to buy positive land management which in turn supports food security by protecting natural resources. A 2012 report from Natural England, highlighted existing environmental stewardship options which benefit agricultural production by supporting pollinating insects, regulating pests and supporting soil formation. In turn therefore, greening requirements can be implemented in way which supports agricultural production but in order to be most effective, an ambitious approach is necessary.&#xa0;Lessons learnt&#xa0;6. What are the principal lessons the Government should learn from the implementation of the previous CAP&#xa0;6.1 During the CAP Health Check in 2008, the UK government expended significant political capital to secure a set-aside mitigation measure in cross compliance. However, when it came to implementation, the Secretary of State chose to pursue a voluntary approach via the Campaign for the Farmed Environment (CFE). Whilst the CFE has raised awareness among farmers about the best way to optimise environmental benefit from land management options and in some regions has delivered greater uptake of more effective measures within agri-environment agreements, it did not succeed in its original core objective. We therefore urge the current government to learn from this experience. Defra fought hard for the ability to use a NCS to implement Pillar 1 greening and as this is the only  vehicle which would allow Defra to offer only the most beneficial measures it is important they use it. It is also very important to acknowledge the evidence that voluntary approaches to securing widespread, positive land management decisions are limited in their effectiveness and can only usefully play a role alongside good regulation. The evidence base which led Defra to prioritise these objectives during negotiations has not changed therefore making full use of both is the only logical outcome.   &#xa0;6.2 There are also clear lessons to learn from the evidence and practical experience gained during the operation of Environmental Stewardship and these should inform NELMS design and implementation. These are:&#xa0;October 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Latruffe, L. (2010), “Competitiveness, Productivity and Efficiency in the Agricultural and Agri-Food Sectors”, OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 30, OECD Publishing.&#xa0; Rizov, M., Pokrivcak, J. and Ciaian, P. (2013), CAP Subsidies and Productivity of the EU Farms. Journal of Agricultural Economics, 64:&#xa0;537–557 http://www.rspb.org.uk/Images/stateofnature_tcm9-345839.pdf Firbank et al (2013) Delivering multiple ecosystem services from Enclosed Farmland in the UK.  FERA (2012) Ecosystem services from Environmental Stewardship that benefit agricultural production Countryside and Community Research Institute (2010) Estimating the Incidental Socio-economic Benefits of Environmental Stewardship Schemes. Natural Capital Committee (2013) The State of Natural Capital: Towards a framework for measurement and valuation (p. 48) LEI and IEEP (2009) Study on the economic, social and environmental impact of the modulation provided for in Article 10 of Council Regulation (EC) No 1782/2003. Directorate General for Agriculture and Rural Development Contract Nº 30-CE-0162480/00-47 European Parliament Policy Department B (2013) European Council Conclusions on the Multiannual Financial Framework 2014-2020 and the CAP Cao, Y et al (2009) Estimating the Scale of Future Environmental Land Management Requirements for the UK GHK (2011) Costs of Implementing the UK Biodiversity Action Plan – 2010 Update. A report for Defra. E.g. RSPB case study on Tarnhouse Farm, a Cumbria upland farm. For example, see Rural Analysis Associates (2011) Defining the Vulnerable Areas of Scotland. A report for the Highland and Island Councils. EEA (2009) High Nature Value Farmland in Europe: http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/high-nature-value-farmland-in-europe Nowicki et al (2009) Scenar 2020-II - Update of Analysis of Prospects in the Scenar 2020 Study - Contract No. 30-CE-0200286/00-21. European Commission, Directorate-General Agriculture and Rural Development, Brussels.&#xa0; Based on 30% of the anticipated Pillar I allocation for England  Council of the European Union (2011) Simplification of the CAP beyond 2013. Brussels.  Natural England (2012) Ecosystem Service from Environmental Stewardship that benefit agricultural production.