&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from Professor Nigel White, Professor of Public International Law,]]]

[[[University of Nottingham (PCD 01)]]]1. This submission considers the issue of Parliament’s role in war powers from three perspectives: democracy, military efficiency and international law. The latter is the primary legal focus since the constitutional law of the UK provides for very little regulation of decisions to go to war, to use force or to deploy significant UK forces abroad (which are all seen as core prerogative powers in the hands of the executive branch of government). The contention is that international law should be the primary framework and that, indeed, public law should be built on this framework either in the form of a War Powers Resolution or a War Powers Act of Parliament. The relative merits of each will be discussed. 

[[[Syria and Parliament]]]2. The debate held in the House of Commons at the end of August, and the failure to approve a proposal to use force against Syria in response to the use of chemical weapons, have been discussed either as a triumph for democracy or as a failure to enforce fundamental norms of international law and to fulfil the UK’s international responsibilities, when it is probably neither. However, in my view the episode leans more towards the former than the latter given that the necessity to use force, certainly at that time, was not established and clearly many MPs, as well as the public, were sceptical about the involvement of British forces in Syria.  3. The debate turned on the issues of evidence and timing of military action, although it also raised questions of international law. As with many Parliamentary debates on a proposed use of force, a number of speakers addressed the international legal issues, although opinion seemed to be split on whether the UK had the right to act without the authority of the Security Council. There was a very brief summary provided by the Attorney General put before the House of Commons ahead of the vote, claiming a clear legal basis in the doctrine of humanitarian intervention, which is of doubtful pedigree under international law. The proposed intervention was primarily a punitive reprisal, taken as a response to a use of chemical weapons which constituted a violation of fundamental norms and a crime against humanity - a different proposition to humanitarian intervention, but one equally problematic in international law (at least if taken without UN Security Council authority). 4. Thus, international law was central to the discussion and in a way may have helped to shape the outcome, despite the assertions and counter-assertions about the legality of the proposed use of force. The proposed use of force was not primarily about protecting the Syrian people but about punishing the Assad regime for the criminal use of chemical weapons but also preventing him from using them again. The latter could be said to be a humanitarian justification but until the regime’s responsibility and the imminent need to use force to prevent another use had clearly been established the case for air and missile strikes was unconvincing.     

[[[A Role for ]]]

[[[Parliament in Conflict Decisions]]]5. Syria has been important for democracy because it showed that although executives have the legal power to go to war or to use force, they are increasingly concerned with gaining approval from the wider polity. It almost seemed that Parliament and Congress were alternative fora for gaining authorisation in the absence of a functioning Security Council. Legally speaking this does not make sense given that the Security Council has the power to authorize enforcement action against another state while the UK or US clearly do not have such a power. In terms of legitimacy, however, it makes more sense if the proposed use of force is necessary to tackle imminent humanitarian catastrophe and the Security Council is, because of its institutional flaws, abjectly failing to address the issue. This was arguably the position in Kosovo in 1999. 6. There is little doubt that until force was threatened against Syria, leading to the current process of chemical weapons inspection and removal, the Security Council had achieved very little in terms of diplomacy or action in relation to the violence in Syria. The Resolution agreed on 27 September 2013 does not authorise any use of force to enforce Syrian compliance with the requirement to hand over its chemical weapons, although it may well be interpreted in this way. Arguably the current process of disarming the chemical stockpile simply frees up the regime to use conventional force against the rebels and their strongholds irrespective of civilian casualties – something that it has been doing since 2011 and something that was deemed a crime against humanity in a UN Report that year. A humanitarian catastrophe continues to unfold in Syria but this should not prevent Parliament from making judgments about when to intervene in such a conflict where there is no guarantee that military intervention will improve the situation for civilians. 7. Parliamentary approval for any use of force has become essential primarily because of the anachronism of unregulated prerogative powers. Powers that once belonged to monarchs should not be wielded without proper democratic accountability; indeed they should be effectively regulated/replaced by clear statutory rules. In medieval times monarchs could decide to go to war without having to seek any approval but they often struggled to raise both armies and monies, issues which still remain but seem less pressing. Military efficiency has improved over the centuries enabling the government to deploy forces overseas more easily, and yet democratic accountability has not increased sufficiently to match this. ‘War powers’ is a topic often characterised by arguments about military efficiency versus democratic accountability. The former has been allowed to outstrip the latter; but in any case one should not be achieved at the expense of the other.  8. Further reasons for greater democratic control of the armed forces include: public dissatisfaction with the number of wars and the number of British casualties, without any perceived improvement in the international security situation; and a realisation that such decisions should not be solely made by a handful of individuals in the war cabinet, a perception heightened by the ‘sofa’-form of government of recent years. 9. One of the main reasons often given for allowing quick executive decision-making to take military measures was to enable a government to defend the realm from attack. The core of sovereignty, the raison d’être of a state, is to protect the country from attack, invasion and occupation. This is embodied in the inherent right of self-defence recognised in international law in both the UN Charter and customary law. Since 1945 the UK has claimed the right of self-defence in relation to its response to the Argentinian invasion of the Falklands in 1982 and in a collective response alongside the US to the attacks of 9/11 in 2001. However, even in these situations the defensive response was not immediate and allowed significant Parliamentary debate although no vote was taken. The orthodox approach that the executive took the decision and then Parliament could comment and evaluate afterwards prevailed. This provides a retrospective form of accountability but in reality it puts Parliament in an unenviable position of being critical of an existing war which would potentially undermine national and military morale. Furthermore, most significant deployments and uses of force are not taken to defend the country from attack. Thus, what was once the rationale for the prerogative power to go to war should no longer dictate the decision-making process.10. Most uses of force are not taken to defend the territorial integrity or political independence of the UK from outside attack, but are concerned with enforcing international laws (Iraq in 2003 and proposed in Syria in 2013), or preventing humanitarian catastrophes (Kosovo 1999, Libya 2011). International law does not provide any clear rights or duties here in the absence of an authorization from the Security Council. The emergence in the 21st century of the ‘Responsibility to Protect’, when a government fails to protect its population from crimes against humanity, has not (yet) shaken off the shackles of the Security Council in part due to the perceived lack of alternative and legitimate security communities. In these controversial cases where military action is proposed in order to prevent crimes against humanity there are very few instances when the executive has to take action without having time to go to Parliament, although it had to in the face of imminent humanitarian catastrophe threatened by the Gaddafi regime against Benghazi in 2011 when force was used under clear UN authority before a vote was held in the House of Commons. 11. Thus, in most instances (including of self-defence and humanitarian necessity) there is time for Parliament to be involved in a meaningful way in decisions to deploy significant forces or to use military force. It would be an exceptional situation where the government has to deploy forces in an emergency without seeking Parliamentary approval. Parliamentary involvement would not hamper the operational effectiveness of any military action, but it would mean that Parliament may prevent the deployment or use of force because the majority of MPs are not convinced by the Government’s arguments that there is a need to use force. Bearing in mind the Government’s strong position in Parliament, giving Parliament a say in conflict decisions should not be seen as a permanent barrier to the effective prosecution of wars, but only a barrier that might come down if Parliament remains unconvinced by the Government’s arguments and justifications. 

[[[The Insufficiency of Recent]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[P]]]

[[[ractice]]]12. The recent practice (starting with Iraq in 2003 and most recently Syria in 2013) of seeking approval in Parliament prior to a use of force does not jeopardize the prerogative power. Although the Prime Minister may choose, for political or democratic reasons, not to exercise prerogative powers in the face of Parliamentary disapproval as in the Syrian debates, there is no doubt that such a power remains and all that Parliament is doing legally is commenting upon its proposed use. Accountability is in effect being brought forward to before the use of force commences, as opposed to waiting to a later point, but it remains an exercise in limited political accountability nonetheless.13. Requiring positive approval in the form of a substantive resolution not ‘approving’ or ‘supporting’ the Government’s decision, but forming part of that ‘decision’ to authorize the use of force, might appear to jeopardize Parliament’s role as a mechanism of accountability. Nevertheless, Parliament’s powers of scrutiny would be enhanced. The executive proposal would be scrutinised by Parliament and, if it passes that scrutiny, then Parliament will ultimately decide on the use of force. Parliament not only performs an accountability function it takes co-responsibility for the decision that emerges. It makes Parliament’s role central in conflict decisions and furthermore it makes it central at the crucial time. 14. In addition, the current position is that the Government can use its prerogative powers to deploy troops and forces ready to use force and then go to the House for support just before the actual use of force is planned (as in Iraq in 2003), making it extremely difficult for the House to vote against it in the face of a build up to war knowing in any case that the prerogative power remains. Arguably, when the UK is threatening to use force and backs that threat by the deployment of forces, it has already potentially violated international law (which prohibits both the threat and use of force) and, therefore, any  UK ‘decision’ to do so should have been made prior to the deployment and accompanying threat of force.15. It follows that the current position is unsatisfactory not only because it leaves the prerogative untouched, at least in legal terms, it allows the Government to manipulate the agenda, to make threats, to deploy forces and then go to the House for political reasons to seek approval for its decision to use force. The fact that this now normally takes place before the actual use of kinetic force is an improvement on much of the earlier practice, but it does not increase democratic input into decision making sufficiently in this era of legally controversial uses of force. The Syrian debate may mislead us into thinking that we have finally tipped the balance in favour of democracy but, although it does nudge us in that direction, the evidence is that better executive management of the build up to the debate would have enabled the Government to have gained approval. 

[[[Resolution or Statute?]]]16. Would a War Powers Resolution constitute a real legal limitation on prerogative powers? The reform proposal that was due to be laid before Parliament for approval before the general election in May 2010, took the form of a non-binding war powers resolution,  giving the Prime Minister maximum flexibility as to the timing of seeking approval from the House of Commons for a Government decision authorising the use of force by British armed forces outside the UK. As with the invasion of Iraq in 2003, this may mean that the timing of the vote will be such as to ensure that it is too late for the House of Commons to realistically say no. In addition, under the draft resolution, there would have been no need for the Government to seek retrospective approval when the operation was urgent or secret. Furthermore, the proposed resolution would not have required the Attorney General to make his full advice available to Parliament, though legal reasons would normally be given.  In reality this represented little change from the current constitutional position and had the added advantage, from the Government’s point of view, of being in a non-statutory form thereby making sure that the Courts are not enticed into the debate about the legality of decisions to go to war.  Even an improved Resolution would not replace the prerogative although its acceptance and usage would produce a convention. This would have some value in constitutional law in qualifying the prerogative further by recognising the entitlement of Parliament to vote and not simply to be consulted prior to a use of force. 17. This leads to the issue of whether a War Powers Statute would reduce military efficiency too much by introducing the possibility of judicial review. Such a path might be seen as not only increasing democracy by making Parliament co-responsible for a decision to go to war but also moving the accountability function towards the Courts in the form of judicial review. However, while the Courts would be concerned with whether the procedure of the Statute was being complied with, for instance, whether a vote in the House of Commons was undertaken in a procedurally correct way; or whether the House of Commons had been given sufficient information, including on the legality of the proposed operation, upon which to make an informed decision. Under a War Powers Statute the Courts may declare, in obvious cases where there is clearly no emergency situation, that the Government had not been entitled to take action first and ask Parliament later. Thus, the Courts would be concerned with clear abuse of the process, but not with detailed arguments about the legality of going to war under international norms.  Proceedings before the Courts would not delay military action and any declaration by the Courts that the Statute had not been complied with should lead to the Government modifying its behaviour in the future. In this way jurisprudence would help develop and embed the Statute in a way that would not hamper effective military action. 18. Given that international law is a much more open-textured system than domestic law, and the area is in a state of flux particularly with arguments about the nature and extent of the Responsibility to Protect, it would not be appropriate for a British court to decide or even comment on the legality of the use of force itself, although it would be concerned with the question of whether Parliament had been given sufficient information on the legal basis so as to make an informed decision. There is sufficient evidence of the Courts’ deference on such matters to be confident that they would not see this as an opportunity to assert powers of review over Government and Parliament. The Courts already recognise that these are decisions for the political organs making difficult judgments in constantly changing international security situations. 19. While a War Powers Resolution may be a useful interim step and a practical limitation on prerogative powers, only a Statute would clearly ground the final decision to go to war in Parliament. The price is the possibility of greater judicial involvement. However, while the Courts have moved towards the assertion of jurisdiction over prerogative powers since the GCHQ case of 1985, they have seen issues of war powers as not suited to judicial determination and have therefore declared such issues non-justiciable. The reason behind this is that the Courts should not become involved in matters of foreign policy and in issues of use of force in that these are decisions for the elected Government and not for the Courts. Such an approach would continue under a War Powers Act given the rationale is that it is the type of governmental decision that is not reviewable whether it is derived from prerogative powers or not. Given this abstinence, the reality is that the Courts would not present a brake on operational efficiency or the general ability of the executive to prosecute a war, but they would keep the Government and Parliament honest in the way they interpret a War Powers Act. 20. Decisions to deploy significant forces or to use force would normally be made prior to deployment or use; but an ex post decision would have to be catered for in cases of necessity of self-defence and humanitarian action, but only where immediate force is necessary to combat an imminent attack or to prevent an imminent humanitarian catastrophe where there is ‘no choice of means and no moment for deliberation’. Indeed, British deployments and uses of force since 1945 show that in most instances there is time for debate and decision so that prior co-decision making should be the norm and the exceptions should be carefully defined in order to prevent exploitation.  

[[[Outline of Content of a War Powers Resolution/Statute]]]21. Given the difficulty international law has in providing precise definitions it should only be used as a framework for the conditions that should trigger the application of a War Powers Resolution/Statute. On this basis non-legal language should be used and the triggers for co-decision making should not be the ‘use of force’ or the presence of ‘armed conflict’, but any proposed decision to deploy significant numbers of British troops/forces to an overseas crisis, conflict or post-conflict situation. Given that the desire is to have meaningful decision-making at a stage when force is being contemplated rather than actuated, it should occur at the point when troops/forces are being identified and plans are being drawn up. There is the danger that this might give too much information to a potential enemy, but most interventions are not premised on surprise (with the exception of Suez in 1956), but are taken in response to invasions (Korea 1950, Falklands 1982, Iraq 1990) or as part of an incremental response to threats to the peace (for instance in Bosnia in 1992-5).22. A Resolution/Statute should apply to any significant deployment of UK forces whether they are bound for peacekeeping, peace support, peace enforcement or war fighting. To exclude peacekeeping forces on the basis that they traditionally do not become engaged as combatants might tempt the Government into sending the wrong sort of force in order to escape scrutiny, but in any case most modern peacekeeping operations are authorised by the Security Council to use force not only to defend themselves, but to defend civilians and, more broadly, their mandates. In addition, mission creep can lead to soldiers being tasked with additional duties leading to long-term and dangerous military commitments. Thus, sending a UK contingent of 1,000 soldiers to a peace operation in what appears to be a post-conflict situation would be, I argue, a significant deployment and, therefore, ought to be covered by any War Powers Resolution/Statute.        23. The Government needs to give sufficient information to Parliament in order for it to make an informed decision. Information to be laid before the House would include the full legal opinion of the Attorney General, which if not sufficiently detailed or otherwise satisfactory should be supplemented by further advice sought by Parliament or a Committee of the House of Commons. This would enable Parliament to take a balanced decision. It might feel, for example,  that the proposed action is not fully grounded in international law but is legitimate and necessary; or it might reject the assertions of legality by the Government. 24. Only very exceptionally in cases of imminent attack or humanitarian catastrophe, leaving no choice of means and no moment for deliberation, can the decision by Parliament be made after threat/deployment/use of force and then it should normally be given within a short period (within seven days would seem reasonable). On-going prosecution of the war should be undertaken by the executive with regular review by Parliament and relevant Select Committees (or a newly constituted War Powers Committee). Any substantial change of direction in the prosecution of the war, for example from protection of civilians to regime change, would require a new decision. 

[[[    ]]]

[[[ ]]]10 October 2013  &#xa0;&#xa0; The Government’s proposal stipulated that the Security Council should immediately consider the initial findings of the UN’s investigating team and that every effort should be made to secure a Security Council resolution and, in any case, a further vote would be held in the House of Commons before force would be used. The Opposition’s proposal imposed a number of additional conditions, including that there was a clear basis in international law for taking military action -   Hansard HC, Vol 466, col 1425 and 1440 (29 August 2013).  Although both David Cameron and Edward Milliband accepted that there was scope in international law for military intervention without the authority of the Security Council – Hansard HC, Vol 466, col 1444 (Milliband), col 1426 (Cameron citing the AG’s opinion). For examples of contrary opinion see col 1427 (Lucas), col 1443 (Huppert), col 1489 (Blunt), col 1524 (Meacher).   ‘Chemical Weapon Use by Syrian Regime – UK Government Legal Position’ paras 2 and 4. Although the UK has argued the case for humanitarian intervention since the limited military action in northern Iraq to protect the Kurds in 1991 (and again in Kosovo in 1999), there is little legal support for this from other states. Indeed the Foreign Affairs Committee’s inquiry into Kosovo in 2000 found that NATO’s action over Kosovo was unlawful though legitimate on the basis that humanitarian intervention was of doubtful pedigree in international law – HC Foreign Affairs Select Committee, Fourth Report 1999-2000, 7 June 2000, paras 124-44. This was raised in the debate over Syria – see Hansard HC, Vol 466, col 1516 (Abbott). Reprisals, as with humanitarian intervention, are generally seen as prohibited uses of force under international law since the UN Charter prohibited force in 1945. In 1970 the UN General Assembly declared in a consensus resolution, commonly seen as part of the fabric of international law, that reprisals were unlawful – UNGA Res 2625 (1970), known as the Declaration on Friendly Relations. This point was raised in the Syrian debate in Hansard HC, Vol 466 col 1541 (Alexander).  After being defeated in the vote over proposed military action against Syria the Prime Minister was asked whether he would still use the royal prerogative to order military action. He answered that although he strongly believed in the ‘need for a tough response to the use of chemical weapons, … I believe in respecting the will of the House of Commons. It is very clear tonight that … the British Parliament, reflecting the views of the British people, does not want to see British military action. I get that, and the Government will act accordingly’ – Hansard HC, Vol 466, col 1555-6 (Cameron).    Article 42 UN Charter. The Security Council had found a threat to the peace but had not authorised the use of force – see UNSC Resolutions 1199 and 1203 (1999). See UNSC Resolution 2118, 27 September 2013, para 21 ‘Decides, in the event of non-compliance with this resolution, including unauthorized transfer of chemical weapons, or any use of chemical weapons by anyone in the Syrian Arab Republic, to impose measures under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter’. Human Rights Council-appointed Independent International Commission of Inquiry Report of November 2011, UN Doc A/HRC/S-17/2/Add 1, 23 November 2011. Conservative Democracy Task Force, An End to Sofa Government: Better Working of Prime Minister and Cabinet (2006). The Courts have recognised this for example in Attorney General v Tomline (1880) 14 Ch.D 66 – ‘There is a duty on the King, by reason of his being King, to defend the realm, and therefore of course all his realm and every part of his realm’. Article 51 of the UN Charter states in part that ‘Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the United Nations …’. Customary law is often said to be embodied in the statement found in the Caroline incident of 1837 that the state exercising the right of self-defence has to ‘show a necessity of self-defence, instant, overwhelming, leaving no choice of means and no moment for deliberation’ - The Caroline (Exchange of Diplomatic Notes between the United Kingdom … and the United States), Letter from Mr Webster to Mr Fox (24 April 1841), (1842) British and Foreign State Papers 1129, 1138. N.D. White, Democracy Goes to War: British Military Deployments under International Law (Oxford University Press, 2009) chapters 7 and 8. International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty (ICISS), ‘Responsibility to Protect’ (International Development Centre, Ottawa, December 2001). See the 2005 UN Summit World Outcome Document which made it clear that any collective action under Chapter VII was envisaged as being taken through the Security Council ‘on a case-by-case basis’, in cooperation with relevant regional organisations, should peaceful means prove inadequate - UNGA Resolution 60/1 (2005) paras 138-9. In the debate on Syria opinion was divided as to whether R2P could be operated outside the Security Council – for example Hansard HC, Vol 466 , col 1430 (Baldry – arguing that the UK could undertake R2P); col 1479 (Lucas arguing Security Council approval was necessary). SC Resolution 1973 (2011). The practice of consulting Parliament has been embedded in the Government’s Cabinet Manual in 2011 to acknowledge a convention that before troops were committed the House of Commons ‘should have the opportunity to debate the matter’ except in emergency situations – HC Political and Constitutional Reform Committee, ‘Parliament’s role in conflict decisions: an update’, Eighth Report of Session 2013-14, September 2013, para 4.  Article 2(4) of the UN Charter prohibits both the threat and use of force in international relations.UK Ministry of Justice, ‘The Governance of Britain – Draft Constitutional Renewal Bill’, Command Paper 7342 (March 2008), Annex A.  See further Ministry of Justice, ‘The Governance of Britain Review of the Executive Royal Prerogative Powers’: Final Report, 15 (15 October 2009). ‘A declaration of non-compliance would have no legal effect on a government decision to deploy the armed forces, and no criminal or other liability would flow from the government action’ – R. Joseph, The War Prerogative (Oxford University Press, 2013) 215.  Many examples could be given to support this. One is Richards J  in The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament v The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom [2002] EWHC 2777 at para 59: ‘A plain purpose of the present claim is to discourage or inhibit the Government from using armed force against Iraq without a further Security Council resolution. Thus the claim is an attempt to limit the Government's freedom of movement in relation to the actual use of military force as well as in relation to the exercise of diplomatic pressure in advance. That takes it squarely into the fields of foreign affairs and defence. In my view it is unthinkable that the national courts would entertain a challenge to a Government decision to declare war or to authorise the use of armed force against a third country. That is a classic example of a non-justiciable decision. I reject Mr Singh's submission that it would be permissible in principle to isolate and rule upon legal issues e.g. as to whether the decision was taken in breach of international law. The nature and subject matter of such a decision require it to be treated as an indivisible whole rather than breaking it down into legal, political, military and other components and viewing those components in isolation for the purpose of determining whether they are suited to judicial determination. The same objections of principle apply to an attempt to isolate in advance a potential legal component of a possible future decision with a view to limiting the Government's freedom of movement when taking the decision itself’. CCSU v Minister for the Civil Service [1985] AC 374. CND case, above note 21, para 50, Kay J described non-justiciability as rules ‘the courts have imposed upon themselves in recognition of the limits of judicial expertise and of the proper demarcation between the role of the courts and the responsibilities of the executive under our constitutional settlement’.  See for example, the judgment of the Constitutional Court of Germany which considered arguments about the legality of German contributions to KFOR in Kosovo, but concentrated on compliance with constitutional processes and laws rather than legality under international law – Parliamentary Group of the Left Party v Federal Government of Germany, 13 October 2009. Caroline incident, above note 12. See also Joseph, above note 20, 195.