                            Written evidence submitted by the Karen Women’s OrganizationThis submission is made by the Karen Women’s Organisation to the British Parliament’s International Development Committee as part of its investigation into the state of democracy and development in Burma. The Karen Women’s Organisation and its members welcome the opportunity to submit comments regarding the United Kingdom’s Aid to Burma. We are a community based organisation made up of Karen women and we provide empowerment activities and services within our community. Who we are and what we do are both explained in more detail at the end of this submission.  

[[[Summary]]]We would like to make the following main points regarding aid from the United Kingdom, which we explain in more detail below:

[[[Detailed Submission]]]The world has watched changes sweep through Burma at a rate none would have predicted.  Aung San Suu Kyi is now in Parliament after being one of the longest held political prisoners in the world.  Labor unions have been allowed to organize.  Hundreds of political prisoners have been released and over 1000 people have been removed from the blacklist.  Preliminary ceasefires have been signed with many ethnic organisations after decades of fighting against the dictatorship.  These changes have gotten a great deal of international press.  There are ongoing problems however and we are far from the democracy and justice the people of Burma have hoped and worked for. &#xa0;Violence against the stateless Rohingya population has been encouraged and condoned by many in the Burmese government.  Most repressive laws within Burma remain unchanged.  Most political prisoners were only provisionally released and remain subject to restrictions and re-arrest at any time and new political arrests continue. The 2008 constitution continues to enshrine military domination throughout the country and the oppression of ethnic minorities. &#xa0;There is a tentative ceasefire in place between the government and the Karen National Union in our traditional area.  However, there are continued human rights violations and no code of conduct for the military is in place between the armed combatants. We have no right to democracy or self determination within Burma.  Many of our community based organisations remain illegal, leaving us to work in secrecy.    Until the underlying issues are resolved we fear a new outbreak in violence as we watch the Burmese military build their military presence in our area.  &#xa0;In August of 2012 the Physicians for Human Rights issued a report called, "Bitter Wounds and Lost Dreams, Human Rights Under Assault in Karen State, Burma".  They found continuing human rights violations despite current reforms.  In summary the report found, &#xa0;"Over the last two years the Burmese government made several changes to bring the country closer to a democracy,…. The effects of these initiatives, however, have yet to reach people in Karen State in eastern Burma or other minority ethnic groups in the country’s border areas. PHR documented abuses that occurred between January 2011 and January 2012 …. PHR’s research shows …. as citizens in Rangoon experienced new freedoms, nearly one third of the families we surveyed in Karen State reported human rights violations. Notably, some violations were up to eight times higher in areas occupied by the Burmese army than in areas contested by the Burmese army and insurgent groups. The data suggest that ceasefires do not in themselves end human rights violations for some ethnic minorities, and that the Burmese government must do more to guarantee their human rights." &#xa0;Business development throughout eastern Burma is increasing with no meaningful enforced regulation, nor an empowered citizenry ensuring local benefits and environmental protection. We receive constant reports of land confiscations, by the military, at the behest of or in preparation for development. This happens with no democratic process for the voice of local people.   Our precious natural resources are being dammed and extracted as our people suffer.  These resources are the property of all of Burma’s citizens not just the military commanders and their cronies. &#xa0;It is into this environment that United Kingdom’s aid flows and because of this environment great care must be taken.  The Government of Burma is not a benevolent democratic institution that works to serve the population, nor is it a monolith.  There are clearly forces for positive change in the Government but there also are significant portions of the government and the military who continue to work against democracy, for their own power and enrichment.  DFID funding going directly through the government touches all those hands not just the hands of those working for a better future. &#xa0;Any DFID aid should be used to increase transparency to and the involvement of the people in the area.  Additional efforts should be put in place to protect against corruption and abuse of resources.  No DFID aid should be awarded in such a way as to enhance the power, wealth or credibility of the military or the companies and organisations it controls directly or indirectly.  Great care should be taken to review the ownership and relationships using resources like the Cronies list prepared by the US Campaign for Burma. All DFIC aid should increase the capacity and resources of those organisations made up of community members.&#xa0;There is a huge influx of aid and International NGO’s into Burma right now.  This is happening in the name of building democracy and assisting people in our country.  The question before you is how to make sure that actually happens. There are examples from all over the world of aid that has completely failed in post conflict situations.  We do not want that to be our fate or the fate of the generous donations from the people of the United Kingdom.  KWO strongly believes that INGO’s should not directly implement projects but should work through and partner with local NGO’s and CBO’s to strengthen them.  This model by its nature will build the capacity of local partners and create a base for sustainable programs. &#xa0;KWO has partnered with villages to build and run nursery schools throughout Karen State.  We currently have about 88 schools functioning.  They are simple affairs where the community builds the bamboo facility and we work to provide teacher training, teacher stipends, supplies, and some nutritious food when we can. One example of the problems we see is that there are now donors coming into that area preparing to build and open schools.  They appear to have no knowledge of these community run schools and are not currently partnering with us.  This is partly just ignorance but also due to the choice they’ve made to work exclusively through the Government.  We will be the first to tell you that the schools we run need more resources.  There remain huge unmet needs, however we do not believe that creating a whole system separate from what the community has built for itself will provide a base for strong communities. It will weaken those villages by taking the schools out of their hands.  This is just one example among hundreds.  We use our own situation not because we are alone in this experience but because it is the example we know best.  DFID must put additional efforts in place to ensure they do not contribute to this problem.&#xa0;One issue DFID must deal with is, we are not a registered organisation in Burma.  Many organisations working in Burma are not and cannot be.  We would not be eligible under the current rules and may be blacklisted.  Organisations like ours that are registering are having to change their name because the Burmese government will not allow us to call ourselves Karen or even the Burmese name for our people, Kayin.  They are similarly restricting the Karenni organisation, insisting they call themselves Kayah.   They do not want organisations which do they type of combined services and empowerment which KWO has been built on.  We know we are an important part of building peace in Burma and aid from DFID should be able to go to organisations like ours with a long standing record of successful programs in a wide variety of areas.  We and other organisations struggle to maintain our culture, language, identity, and way of life.  The Burmese Government continues to try to destroy those vital components to lasting peace. We support a diverse Burma with a rich multi-cultural citizenry.&#xa0;Until Burma has reasonable rules which allow all legitimate CBO’s to register and function, your rules must provide for those of us who are cut out by the government.  If you do not, your programs are unwittingly supporting their violations of our human rights. &#xa0;Any democracy needs a strong civil society where people can work together to participate in that democracy.  The Burmese dictatorship spent most of the last 5 decades ripping apart what civil society once existed in Burma.  While some bases of opposition continued to exist the strongest organisations were forced to work in exile and many leaders were jailed, killed, or fled. It will take a great deal of work to create this basic building block of democracy.  DFID can play an important role in strengthening civil society by financially supporting the core operations and capacity building of community based organisations in Burma. In many ways this is the most direct way to support democracy and sustainable peace.  CBO’s need to be able to educate community people about how the constitution works, advocacy, public speaking, environmental protection, women’s rights, human rights, the rule of law, etc.. This  gives people the basic tools needed to participate.  These are things normally provided by the education system and a wide variety of community organisations in places like the United Kingdom.  None of that exists here.  We must all work quickly to create that infrastructure now when there is a small window in which to work.  &#xa0;While activities like building schools or providing food to hungry people are important and many people argue can help build peace, there is little evidence that it actually does.  There is ample evidence that strong community organisations can and do build strong democratic communities. “The strength of civil society is thought to be important in several ways, including encouraging greater civility in public life, increasing the accountability of governments to their peoples, and as a force for democratization…. A strong civil society provides support for the rule of law and observance of human rights. It helps to make the government accountable to the public. It educates the public and state actors about issues. It can provide expertise to complement or challenge that of the state. … a strong civil society ultimately is a force for democratization, and a powerful supporting institution for democratic institutions when they come into existence (Morales et al., 1999). A stronger civil society also increases the capacity of the state to develop and implement policies, and thereby can contribute to economic and social development (Carroll and Carroll, 1999)”. (Civil Society, Democracy, and Development, Barbara Wake Carroll, Department of Political Science McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario Canada and Terrance Carroll, Department of Political Science, Brock University, St. Catharines, Ontario Canada Paper prepared for the meetings of the Canadian Political Science Association, Winnipeg, Manitoba, CANADA June 2004.)DFID should focus substantial funding on strengthening Civil Society organisations in Burma.  There must be funding for Community Based Organisation core operations, advocacy efforts, media free from censors, protection, empowerment education and human rights monitoring.  These are important components to developing civil society.  Our organisation focuses these activities on the women of our community and countless others focus on other groups or geographies.  It is very difficult to get funding for these activities and especially funding for our core operations.  Groups need funding to keep the lights on, telephones, transportation.  These are basic things needed to conduct the important activities Community Based Organisations do.&#xa0;Additionally, we would ask that DFID conduct an independent evaluation of the Legal Assistance Centers you support through the International Refugee Committee in refugee camps in Thailand.  Any evaluation should provide for confidential comments and feedback.  The program was established to create and support a justice system for camp residents.  The program has been in place for a number of years at this point and it is our opinion that the camp justice system continues to fall far short of providing justice. If anything the system continues to weaken rather than improve. Any evaluation should provide for input from women’s and other community based organisations.&#xa0;Our final point is that there continues to be 129,000 refugees from Burma in Thailand living in refugee camps (figure from The Border Consortium Census June 2013). This was an increase from the previous 6 months. Our organisation is made up of refugees in Thailand and women in Burma. While there is hope that refugees will one day return to Burma and be part of building the country, there is broad consensus that now is not yet time for that return, “It is important to note that, currently, the refugee community, the Royal Thai Government, the Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and UNHCR all agree that conditions do not yet exist for an organised return,” (Sally Thompson, Executive Director The Border Consortium, 18 September 2013 press release) Refugees are prohibited from working in Thailand and live in barbed wire enclosed camps.  They need food, shelter and clothing. While aid into Burma has increased it has been cut to refugees.  Food rations as of November 2013 will be below the recommended minimum for nutrition.  We cannot allow the rush of hope for a democratic Burma to create a desperate reality for refugees left behind.  &#xa0;The UK has long been a funder of basic necessities for refugees here in Thailand.  We ask that you increase that commitment and support the CBO’s that work there.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Karen Women’s ]]]

[[[Organisation]]]

[[[:]]]KWO is a community based organisation that provides support to and empowers thousands of Karen women who live as refugees in camps in Thailand or inside the Karen State in Burma. &#xa0;For the last 25 years, KWO has empowered women in our communities, built our capacity to advocate for our rights, and supported the Karen community in maintaining our culture and identity in the face of suppression and upheaval. KWO is currently active in all seven Karen refugee camps along the Thai-Burma border and in seven districts of Karen State within Burma.&#xa0;KWO’s 49,500 members reach countless communities and individuals providing everyday support and assistance. KWO also represents these community-based members at meetings, consultations and workshops on a wide range of issues. Our ability to do this work has been due to the hard work and commitment of our large group of members, position-holders and staff who continue to advance the community in general and Karen women in particular.  KWO is governed and run by elected Karen women throughout the Karen refugee camps and in Karen State. We have always reached out to, spoken for, and supported the most vulnerable and sought to fill needs within the community as they arise. We work in four project areas:  &#xa0;1.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 

[[[Education]]]: KWO runs short term training and longer term education projects designed to afford better opportunities for Karen women and children, and assist them to realize their potential. Projects in this area include education opportunities for children with special needs, nursery schools, support to unaccompanied children, expanding the capacity of our staff and leaders and leadership programs for potential young leaders.2.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 

[[[Social Welfare]]]: KWO provides direct assistance to community members and works to solve social problems in the community. We run safe houses and provide counseling and practical assistance for women and girls who have suffered sexual and genders based violence (SGBV), and support them through the legal systems to attain justice for violations of their rights. We provide care to the elderly and hold activities and ceremonies to maintain traditional Karen culture and respect for our elders. We coordinate an income generation project, assisting women to make clothing and goods that we sell from shops in our Resource Centers.3.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 

[[[Health:]]] KWO provides assistance where it recognizes gaps in existing services in the camps and IDP areas. Karen women in IDP areas have little to no access to healthcare and maternal and infant mortality is one of the highest in the world today. KWO collaborates with community based health agencies to support local health workers and gives material assistance to new mothers in those areas, by providing them with Baby Kits. We also support traditional birth attendants in some of the refugee camps to assist women with safe, home births. KWO advocates on a variety of issues surrounding women’s, maternal and child health with health agencies working both in IDP areas and in the camps. KWO also shares health messages with the community, especially on issues concerning reproductive health.4.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 

[[[Organizing and Information:]]]  KWO does a variety of information gathering and sharing, advocacy, women’s empowerment, and community mobilization. We conduct activities to raise awareness about women’s rights and peace building in the camps and in Karen State and advocate for vulnerable groups.&#xa0;October 2013&#xa0;