&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from Margaret Hill [PHS0027]]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;Complaints: do they make a difference?&#xa0;&#xa0;1.               The gaps in the system appear  to be that all complaints and questions are not addressed.              Replies are not dealt with quickly.  Important questions are just ignored.  This leaves the complainant frustrated and the period of hurt extended  coupled with a further sense of frustration and wondering what else is being covered up.&#xa0;Complaints to the hospital ought to be addressed quickly.  My experience is that following my letter  to the hospital I had a reply giving me a date a month hencefor a reply.  This date came and went.  I wrote again.  Another date for a reply to be given in a  months time.  This time I received a letter  four weeks later saying the hospital would need more time to reply.  This was over three months following an experience and cruelty that ought not to have happened. Some issues were addressed but not all.  (Not all have been addressed still.)&#xa0;I am still waiting to hear what exactly was wrong with Miss xxxx.  I will not accept a general  term for cancer as the death certificate says.   This question  has been ignored.  I still have not had copies of her medical record although  I am legally entitled  to have this information.  Both the hospital and the Ombudsman have ignored these questions although  both have been mentioned more than once over the years.&#xa0;Other outstanding questions are many and varied.  Why did a doctor  not tell us what was happening and etc.   I met him at the door of the ward and he said he would return  and speak with us.  Although I asked to see him he just did not come.&#xa0;Can you imagine what it is to be told on the  Monday afternoon that there was nothing wrong and that she was dying the following day?&#xa0;A little kindness  and sympathy would help.&#xa0;2.              As far as I can see and hear from others experiencing hospitalisation things have not changed in some areas.  Some people have had good service and say so.               It appears that problems  still continue so not much is being learned.&#xa0;There ought to be a department which can deal with complaints. The hospital, naturally, tries to cover up their mistakes.               The Ombudsman appears not toknow what an answer  to a question  really is. There ought to be a member  of the public who has experienced problems and is able to advise and help.  This special department ought to have some representation from the Health Services/Financial Services etc. who can provide professional  information about the basic standard the public ought to experience.  It should include members from difference parts of the country. We ought to know what the services is like over the whole country  and what it ought to be like.&#xa0;The Ombudsman tells me that I have had answers to my questions.  I gave her a list of those still outstanding and asked her where they were as I could not find them.  My letter  has been ignored. Where does one go from here?  If the Ombudsman does not understand then there  is nowhere else to go.  This ought not to happen.&#xa0;All Hospital complaints ought to be on record and kept in one place so that all information  is easily found.   If left to the hospital to keep this sort of information it can be lost easily and has been.                             There ought to be a nationwide information leaflet on what will happen and an assurance that it will be dealt with according to standardised criteria.  It is important to know that questions are being answered and concerns  addressed.              Copies can and ought to be kept at the hospital of any complaints etc.  In this day and age  this is an easy attainment. It is also important that the patient and family get all the information regarding their case. This would make sure that all complaints are dealt with using the same criteria. All complainants would get the benefit of having their cases heard  in the same way.  All patients and families will know what is expected. This also makes it plain for those in hospitals  who ignore questions and lose paperwork.&#xa0;Unlike my own experience. I  have been told they will take me to court should  I write again.   This is much better for Hereford Hospital than giving me answers to my questions. This has been ignored when I told the Ombudsman.&#xa0;Although I have asked about what the hospital  has written to the Ombudsman  it is like a secret service.     The patient or relative who have had cause to complain are being kept in the dark about what happens  to their complaints.&#xa0;If all queries  were given the same importance and dealt with following a set of standards this surely would automatically lead  to a better  service.   It will also be standardised.              Spot checks can be made to ensure the correct procedure is happening.  Those senior executives who are failing to follow the correct guidelines  must accept responsibility. It is not just lip service the public needs but good service, the service which is expected  and paid highly for.&#xa0;I have no idea what complaints cost.  Too much.  This money and the increase of costs is largely due to problems  which arise in hospitals  and then for them to try to cover up.  A great deal of money ought to be saved by the standardisation of this service. This ought to save money in the  long run. Honesty and integrity  ought to be seen to be working.               See brief description of my experiences.              This has taken up more time and expense and still no answers.Some proper  and fair guidelines  would, hopefully rid the system  of the way some hospitals  treat  complaints.&#xa0;Take my own example. Had my complaints been sorted  out correctly  by both the Hospital and the Ombudsman  (I can understand that the hospital find some of the problems which have arisen  in my case difficult to deal with but threatening me is not a solution, lying too does not help)  then I would not still be here over three years later still trying to get some help. The Ombudsman  has been no help either. She has ignored a number of issues raised.  This is why I was more than surprised to read her article in the papers  regarding  people not wanting to make a complaint etc.               I must say that I have met people over the last three years who have not been able to complain and one said she would rather  have the cancer back than go into the hospital again.               Something  needs to be done.&#xa0;3.              This depends  upon individual hospitals  and Ombudsmen etc.  Between our hospital and the Ombudsman  a great deal of time has been taken to get nowhere. Were there a routine  procedure for complaints this could be dealt with more quickly and successfully.  A time limit ought to be put on the length of time given to sort out problems. The hospital ought to know what happened and why.                            If not and they refuse to deal with people kindly and honestly they should be fined heavily.  This would help people get help and support quickly.  Get honest answers too.&#xa0;4.               It is easy to make a complaint.  Write a letter  to the department which has let you down.  Getting it addressed is more difficult.&#xa0;Getting round complaints system is not difficult.  A leaflet or help desk at the hospital/bank etc. can be helpful.  Getting the  complaint  dealt with is more difficult.&#xa0;At the moment because there is no standard way of handling complaints or necessity of answering all questions and explaining the problems  people have had in the system it is a hit and miss affair.               For those of the community who are more vulnerable or who are still reeling from the treatment or the elderly it is particularly difficult.  A simple procedure as outlined  above should help all. One does rely heavily on those dealing with the complaints or help and thisvaries from place to place.  The Ombudsman  must too, if still around,  make sure that her /his assistance must be to answer  honestly  and fully all the questions put and not just ignore those questions she does not want to deal with for whatever reason.  Vulnerable groups  and all of us would be helped by a set of ruleswhich are adhered  to.  The Ombudsman  must be accountable too for the failing to get answers to questions or ignore questions. The Citizens Advice is always available and should be pointed  out to vulnerable people who have been cruelly treated.              The friends of the hospital could help too.&#xa0;The private sector  know that they will lose money and be fined if their services is not good.  People can go to another company.               Members of staff lose their jobs. The health service is not the same.  Hereford has only one hospital.  I doubt if anyone will be told off or lose their job following cruelty an unprofessional conduct or bad practice etc. in the Health Service.  People do not know that they can get help from another hospital should there  be one in the area. A standardisation of expectations in this case is necessary.   It will help the public as well as bring the hospital up to scratch.  All parts of a complaint  is needed to be dealt with not just the bits which are easy.  In the private sector anyone who is not capable of doing their job has go.&#xa0;As the hospitals  run as secret services there is no way they will become more accountable. One cannot get honest answers to questions as to their treatment or lack of it.  The Ombudsman  according to the contact I have had is just assisting  the hospital by not making them give honest answers to questions. The position of the Ombudsman  ought to be outlined  clearly.  If it can be proved that this service is lacking there ought to be some redress.              To have a system and monitor of how problems are dealt with can only change this for the better.  A committee  such as yours could and should be available to point out to the Ombudsman  where he/she is going wrong.  The system ought to allow for complainants to see all the documentation regarding  their case.  Only the hospitlals and the Ombudsman  see the correspondence.  They see letters from the complainant but the complainant never sees the letters to the hospital  from the Ombudsman  or the replies from the Hospital to the Ombudsman. It is therefore neither open or acceptable  for the complainant whose complaint  is chiefly against not being able to get information  or explanation from the hospitals. I thought  this should be an open and honest explanation or etc. This must change at once.&#xa0;I cannot get honest answers or details of the problems of my friend or her medical records which I am legally entitled  to have.  I want to know why we could not get access to a doctor.  Both the hospital and the Ombudsman know this and still ignore me problems.&#xa0;5. This is more difficult.&#xa0;The right balance is to deal with complaints quickly, fully and honestly  and sympathetically. Most people  will accept a genuine apology or explanation. People should be treated kindly.  Not as nuisances or threatened because they are expecting answers to some very serious  questions. To be lied to and have serious  problems ignored does not help.               It is only when things go disastrously wrong that people resort  to the courts or the newspapers.  Honesty, compassionately, and quickly ought to be high on the criteria  of following up complaints. This would eliminate  for the most part the need to go to court.  It would improve the service too.&#xa0;If one had a definite method and time scale and are made to answer  honestly and fully then most of the litigation costs would not arise.  By having a set of rules would make Hospital workers think twice about being cruel, lying etc. etc. or just ignoring patients and families and thus there  would be fewer people making complaints.  Making it clear to the Ombudsman what is expected  of her would also help.  When questions and information are left out or ignored make people, thosewho are dealing with the death of a family member,   have their experiences prolonged  and worsened. Should the hospital make a genuine mistake then own up to it.  Spending money on trying to bypass any formal litigation will just make matters worse.  Prolongs the pain.  Etc. etc.               If hospitals know they will pay for their cruelty and lack of care they will soon sort themselves out.  Too long have hospitals  ignored the problems of their  patients. It has been seen recently that the only people who have tried to make a difference has been largely the public- some brave and caring  members  of the hospitals  but those in charge of the hospitals  have let ill treatment or lack of care happen for a long time.  Openness and honesty  must be a priority  for those running the hospitals.  If not then a change of staff is necessary. This ought to be made clear to all workers.&#xa0;&#xa0;The hospital not only treated us very cruelly, they have lied, and threatened  me and will not answer  my questions nor deal with the problems they have made. I  have been trying for over three years to get them to be honest etc.  I am notthe only one in this sort of situation in Hereford.&#xa0;The Ombudsman  now should be made to explain herself as to why she does not get answers to questions etc. etc.  I cannot  be the only one to have had problems with her.  Making the Ombudsman  addressing the problems which are put before her honestly and fully would be a beginning.&#xa0;A full explanation  and information  that I asked for at the beginning instead of being lied to or have questions ignored would have been of great  help. Threatening me is not the answer.&#xa0;At present there is no redress either from the hospital, unless one takes them to court,  nor is there  any way of making the Ombudsman get the truth  out of the hospitals.  The Ombudsman  is there to help not make matters worse.&#xa0;6.               People do not know about the Ombudsman  services or the fact that there  is a local government Ombudsman etc.   I  have asked around since I received this form and people just do not know.  It ought to be made clear on a leaflet when one is admitted  to hospital  rather than at a later date when all is not going well. In the past I have written to the Chair of the local council but have not received any reply.  I  know that he made a statement saying he was not going to answer letters because he was busy.  This was not in response to my letter.  We are not well served  here.&#xa0;I do not know how they co-ordinate their roles.  I doubt if they do here.   I am not sure that it is necessary for them to co-ordinate their roles.               Each Ombudsman  would be, hopefully,  an expert on their area.  They all must still have a set of principles of their roles and this must outline, as above, what is needed from them.  This means that although they are all working on a set of principles they all have their expertise.&#xa0;&#xa0;7. To know that complaints are to be handled the same way for all, honestly, fully and with kindness  and  care would need to have very strict rules for all.&#xa0;All hospitals should have someone who is in overall charge of complaints. Procedure,  which has been standardised, must be strictly adhered to.  When a member of the public makes a complaint  they should be treated with respect. (There should be no need to remind these people that they are being paid by these members  of the public.)  A time limit should be set for full responses. Difference departments throughout the hospital will be aware of what is required. This means that although  the illnesses of the patients  will bedifferent and the patients  will be in different wards,  nevertheless, the responsesshould still be made within the guidelines.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;8.               I can only mention  my local MP.              He says he can do nothing to help and should I write to him again then he will not read my letter  but keep it on file.&#xa0;The date of Miss xxxx death was incorrect.              I wrote to my MP.              He contacted  the hospital and I received a copy of the reply.               "She is wrong." The hospital then went on to remind the MP that I am a persistent complainer and it also says that should they hear from me again they will take me to court and pass on the bill. Miss xxxx died on Good Friday.  Not a day to forget. Despite this letter  my MP will do nothing.  I do hope that other  MP's are not giving this sort of service.&#xa0;MP's ought to follow up a complaint.  It is not good enough for them to back out of their responsibility. They should be relied on to make sure that their constituency gets the best available care both within the hospital and later should something  go wrong.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;9.  Complaints should  be dealt with honestly and fully.               If this is not happening then a complaint  will be justified.  Care given to the people making them and why they believe that their complaint  have not been handled  properly.  One must remember that the complainants think they have not been heard  properly. The people who handle the complaints must be responsible. They must be told that they will have to answer  for their  judgement. It is their  job to do so.               So many people get away with not doing their jobs properly.  They must be answerable if they have not given their best service.               Again.               This must be done more quickly than is usual at present.               &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;Those responsible must also remember that they are dealing with people who have been hurt, cruelly treated etc. etc. &#xa0;Following a well thought out and honest set of guidelines tribunals ought to decrease.  Those dealing with tribunals should  have a strict set of guidelines. A simple explanation  of what is to happen, how and why should be sent tomembers  of the public.  A full, honest review will be necessary.  People ought not to have to walk away from the hospital  believing that they, or a family member have been treated badly.&#xa0;The Ombudsman sounded  like a good idea.  Unfortunately  this Ombudsman  is not fulfilling her position.  To have one or a small group lead by the Ombudsman who are given guidelines to follow and be made responsible to make sure they do exactly what they are supposed to do.  The public needs someone with sympathy who can understand how people are feeling after receiving some of the treatments we have heard about recently and so something positive to change things which will make her job much easier.   It will also change the lives of people who after months and sometimes years of trying to get satisfactory information, apologies etc. from the hospitals  where they have been cruelly treated to know that there is someone who will help.  Should the Ombudsman fail in this then they must be made responsible.               If the Ombudsman is to continue then this post must be filled by someone  who will get answers and explanations.&#xa0;A brief account of my experience with the Ombudsman. I was asking for information  regarding  the death of a friend. Next of kin.               I am sole executor and therefore on these two accounts  I am legally entitled  to have this information. The day before she was taken into hospital  we were told there was nothing wrong with her.   This was the third time we visited to doctors during the three weeks prior to her being admitted.&#xa0;She spent the first day being tested  and given ex rays etc. then went into a mixed sex ward after 10.00p.m.  She was admitted shortly after 8. a.m.  Most of thenext day she spent in ITU.              I met a doctor on his way out of her room on my return  from the toilet.  He said he would come back to speak with us shortly. am still waiting. Back in the noisy mixed sex ward was an horrific experience.              It was noisy.&#xa0;There was no privacy.               No doctor saw her during that time.  l did not go home till well after midnight and showered and changed and was back in the hospital well before 5a.m. Therefore I know who helped her or who came to her.  I left her side only to go to the toilet.   I asked to see the doctor.   No-one came. There was a young man on the ward who was helping the nurses at their station to eat their sweets and there was much laughter  and noise during this time.  I thought  he was a porter.&#xa0;I  kept the oxygen mask on my friend and made sure that the drips did not come out.  She was in a great deal of pain and very restless. There was no privacy for her nor was she able to rest in this environment. This young man came over late that day and walked past and asked to speak with me.               He told me that all was being done for her??????The following day about midday a nurse walked past and shouted  to her colleagues "Get her out of here".  Two nurses  hurried  and got the bed out of the ward and we were taken to a side ward of a large neighbouring ward.  Thenurse in charge there shouted  from a side ward "I told them to give me 15 minutes", and then looked over and said "It would not have made anydifference".  This little ward had been empty all this time.  It was disgustingly dirty, dead flies on the floor and windowsills.  A cleaner came with a wet cloth and wiped the sills quickly but did not manage to remove all the dead flies.  She also wiped a chair so that I could sit down.  It still would have been preferable to the other ward.&#xa0;I cannot get answers  to my questions regarding  exactly what was wrong with my friend.&#xa0;The hospital lied and said that there was no other  place than the mixed sex ward for her.   Not true the little ward we eventually  went into must have been available.               No-one could have been there in those conditions.&#xa0;When in the mixed sex ward a very large man who took off his shirt off appeared naked.               He moved down his bed to look over to her.  When she saw him she was frightened. I was not allowed to pull the curtains across the bottom of the bed to give us privacy.&#xa0;There are many more things but from the above you will understand some of the problems we had.&#xa0;Our present Ombudsman  replied to me and said "it appeared that this man ......". Ireplied and told her that he was looking and that it was not up to her to change the meaning of my letters.  She also told me that my questions had been answered.              I asked her where these answers were as I could not find them. Nothing.  I asked why I could not get any information  about the medical problems of my friend nor the medical records during the time she spent in hospital.   Nothing.&#xa0;Our present Ombudsman  is letting us down.               I say us because I cannot  be theonly one with difficulties.&#xa0;The hospital has written to me threatening me.               They have said that I am a constant complainer. Not true. I am a constant asker of questions. This would not have been necessary  had we not had this treatment. Nor would I still be asking questions had they answered honestly and fully and given me the right information  that I asked for.&#xa0;The date on the death certificate  is incorrect.  The documentation did not get to the funeral directors on time and I had to change the date of the funeral. When I got to the hospital to pick up the death certificate  it was not ready.  A doctor refused  to sign it and I  had to go back again.&#xa0;The hospital has responded to some of this problem.  It has said that I ought to have been told when to collect the certificate.  I was and was there at the time and day they told me.               The hospital  has not mentioned not getting the documents to the funeral director on time at all.  Neither has the Ombudsman. There is more but you can see from the above the problems we had and I  have had subsequently.&#xa0;I was unable to get access to the doctor.               I did not see her given a drink or any food at all.              Even during the day she spent  in the A &amp; E.Our Ombudsman  has ignored all of this.   Why?When the Ombudsman  is not following up problems correctly and the hospital appears to have put her off from doing so there is nowhere  to go.  Any system such as the Ombudsman  must be made to work correctly.&#xa0;I have written  to many others  regarding this situation. All tell me that my MP is the one to deal with this.This sort of cruelty, neglect, lies and dishonesty cannot  be allowed to go on. Ann Clwyd had a good platform and was in receipt of a great deal of sympathyand got help and a committee to help.               I don't  know what will be the outcome ofthis but according to her they cannot help me.  Why?&#xa0;10. I have friends who live in France who get a superb service and have never heard of the sort of problems as outlined above.  I  have got friends who live and have worked in Holland and Austria but have never heard then make any remarks as above.               It would be interesting to send a member of the public together with a member  of your team to visit and ask some questions regarding the cruel treatment of their patients.   Get it from the horses’  mouth as it were.&#xa0;I have many friends in America.               Should this happen  over there  they would bestraight to court and it would cost the hospital/doctors a great deal of money.  I do not want this country  to go down this route of litigation  but it may have to for a time until those responsible for ill treatment of patients  learn that ill treatment is not acceptable and they are or ought to be made responsible. The people who are running the hospital ought to be trained,  not only on financial matters but how to respond  to the patients  and families.  Honesty, respect, compassion courtesy  and efficiently is or ought to be an essential.  Friends who live inother  countries have mentioned those who work in their hospitals.  I have hadthree friends who have worked in the system  in America.               Never have I heard of any problems as outlined  above my myself.&#xa0;Wherever  I go people ask about our free health service.  Americans think it is wonderful. This is not so.  Almost one third of my salary was taken from me for tax and insurance. One lump sum each month was for Nat Ins.              We pay for our NHS.&#xa0;11.               The Ombudsman  is not working, not fit for service etc. unless he/she can deal with the members  of the public properly  and honestly.  From my personal experience she has not bothered to get me answers to my questions or information  or medical records  etc. etc.  Only she may have an explanation for her actions  but refuses to  give one.&#xa0;He/she must remember that he/she is there  to get to the truth  not to uphold the misdeeds of the hospital.&#xa0;The individual citizen should be  treated with respect, courtesy  and honestly. The member  of parliament or small committee to oversee the Ombudsman must be able at any time to get information from her and to ask her to explain why shehas come to that conclusion if the complainant is not satisfied.  In fact she must be able to answer  for her decisions.  This should be a trusted  relationship with faith on both sides.  (My present  experiences with the Ombudsman  have not been good.   I have not had questions answered nor information  given.  I  have been threatened by the hospital.  Rather than give me information  they threaten.              The Ombudsman  knows this and has supported them in this behaviour by letting them get away with this.   I must say that I have heard  other stories about how people have been treated  in Hereford Hospital and are too afraid to do anything about it.  No wonder.)&#xa0;The individual must have faith in this service.               It must be seen to be fit for service.&#xa0;Parliament ought to be able to get on with business and not have to wonder what the Ombudsman  is up to.  They also must realise that if things are going wrong then it is time to change the Ombudsman.  Rules ought to be set and adhered  to.  A regular meeting ought to be had by someone, preferably  two people, with the Ombudsman.                A report  ought to be made about the number  of problems arising in certain  hospitals.   In this way information  will be used to keep hospitals on track.               These meetings ought to be backed up with a list of complaints and the outcomes.               With modern  technology all this could be done easily.  Copies of all correspondence must be kept on file either  paper or on computer.  They should be easily available.&#xa0;The Public Administration Select Committee ought to provide details accounts of their meetings with the Ombudsman.  Detailed accounts of the sort of problems they are regularly coming up against the NHS ought to be passed to PASC.              Give statistics to the Government  regarding ongoing problems in some hospitals. Comment on how they, the problems, are dealt with.  In this way statistics can be kept to ensure  that they public are better served.  It might be advantageous for all for a member  of the committee to spend a little time to see how problems are dealt with.               It can only help. In this way they would have a good overview of the hospitals and not be surprised when the odd hospital, as has recently, shown  to be completely  failing. Those who were in charge and who constantly  and persistently let down the patients  and their families should be dealt with.  This includes the medical profession  too.  There ought to be openness between  these two departments.&#xa0;12.               The effectiveness of the Ombudsman  is very difficult to know.   One only hears of the odd complaint.  I enclose a copy of an article from Private Eye. According to this article it appears that I  am not the only one to have this sort of problem and be let down by the Ombudsman. There has got to be many others.&#xa0;From my account, only part of the problems  have I outlined, you can see how very difficult it is for a patient or their family to get any sort of information  from the hospitals.  The Ombudsman  has let  myself down and certainly  the lady whose article appears in Private Eye. As the  Ombudsman,  herself, said in the article she sent around  the newspapers that some people are afraid to complaint because of repercussions when other  members of the family need help.&#xa0;Knowing that she still does not get information  and answers from hospitals.   She ought to be made to do her job properly.               She ought to remember that she is working on behalf of the public.               This does include the hospitals.  She must make sure that all questions are answered and explanations given. All information regarding the condition  of the patient should be given to those who are entitled  to have it and any documentation they ask for. This is the right of the family to have this.               Following the death of a person it does not need to be said that the family are in deep mourning. To be treated cruelly and lied to and threatened and do nothing about it is not part of her job. As far as my experience is concerned  she has been worse than useless. Once personnel in the hospital get away with the treatment we received then supported in this by the Ombudsman  things can only get worse in the hospital. I do not feel that the Ombudsman  has let me down,  I know she has. She gets away with this by just not answering letters. She needs either a kindness, compassion  and caring transplant or she should go. In short  I have found the Ombudsman  not dealing with some problems.               The Ombudsman  knows that the next step is to take court procedures. The Ombudsman  also knows that at this time following the cruel death and ill treatment of the patient and their close family members  is not the time to take out court proceedings against the decision.               They also know that most of the patients  cannot afford this process.  All the cards are stacked against the patient and their families.  The honesty of the Ombudsman should be without question. This is not so as I have found in my experience.&#xa0;13.   If the hospital  refuses to acknowledge its behaviour  and  treats patients  and family in the way they have treated myself then there must be someone to whom one can turn who will sort out the problem.   I mean  sort  the problem out not make it worse by ignoring most of the things  which went wrong and ignoringthe most serious.               Once the NHS have treated people badly and refused and threatened etc. there  must be someone to whom the patient or members  of their family can go to get help.  Truthful,  honest help.  All those to whom I  have written  to in Westminster regarding my problem they all write back and tell me that my MP will sort it out.                 My MP just will not help.&#xa0;There should be someone  to whom a patient or member of the  family  or any citizen can turn to for help following a seriously  bad experience in a hospital. Naturally it would be good for the local MP to be able to stand  in and get things sorted  out.   (He may lose a vote here or there from hospital workers  but would pick up many more from those he has helped. With anyone of any commitment to doing his public duty as our local MP says he has would or should be only too willing to help.  It would also help the MP to get to know a wider public than he usually would.)  If the MP finds that a proper  solution cannot be found then he could and should call upon the Ombudsman.  Again we must have an Ombudsman  who knows when questions have been answered and given information and documents etc. etc.  It would take only a very few cases for an improvement to be made.  It would mean a little more work for the MP originally but it would be reduced  not escalated  in a very short  time.  If hospital workers  know there will be someone who is able to make them take responsibility for their actions or decisions then this can only improve the problem.The Ombudsman would, as outlined above, be able to support and assist the MP if and when necessary. They, both would have their rules.  It would take only a few cases for the improvement of patient care to  become what it ought to be at all times.  It would also benefit the MP to get to  know some more of his constituency. It would give the Ombudsman  time to get a full picture of the whole country and be able to report   to the Government.  It should not be beyond the ken of an MP to know what is acceptable during a hospital  visit.&#xa0;One must also remember that MP's and Ombudsmen would never be treated in the way in which some people have.               People are very concerned  at present having read about what has been happening in some hospitals in this country. This is a huge pity.   I know of many people who have worked in the system and they are caring and professional  people.  All hospital workers  are being spoken of in the same way.  This is not so.  We must get something organised  so that the patients feel as though they can depend  on the service of the hospital  instead of being afraid of it.&#xa0;Redress too is important. People ought to be told that someone  has lost his/her post or has been made to........... so that what they have experienced will not happen again.&#xa0;&#xa0;Comments on background.&#xa0;&#xa0;I found Hereford Hospital to be very difficult to deal with.  After the receipt of my letter  I had an acknowledgement and a  future date of a month later when they would respond  to me.  This date came and went.   I wrote again.  Again another date.  A few weeks later they wrote again telling me they would need more time.&#xa0;This was of no help to someone  who had been cruelly treated,  unable to get to speak to a doctor, etc. etc.&#xa0;I believe that I made a mistake by saying from the outset  that her GP had said there was nothing wrong with her at 5.00 p.m. on the day prior to her admittance on Tuesday morning and she died at lunch time on Friday.&#xa0;I am still waiting for the Ombudsman  to get some information  for me.  i.e. the cause of death and medical notes.  The correct  date of death.  Apologies and reasons for the late arrival of documentation getting to the Funeral Director so that, after all that happened, I  had to change the date of the funeral.&#xa0;The doctor gave the Ombudsman  two statements regarding his not seeing us. The first was that "Had I known that they wanted  to know I would have spoken with them"  the second was "I was told she had gone home".  How  many people do not want to know what was wrong and how long and what wouldhappen etc. etc.                 Also how many nurses chase doctors  around  the hospitals giving them information  about who was visiting etc.  This was just not true. met this doctor coming out of the little ward in ITU.  I had just gone to the toilet at the end of the ward a few yards away.  I say this so you will see the little time I was away from the ward.  The doctor said that he would be back shortly to speak with us.  He did not and would not thought  I asked for him the return to speak with us.&#xa0;The Ombudsman  has ignored all this.               Why?&#xa0;I have met many people who have had problems  with the hospital.  The Ombudsman  has got one thing right and that is that people are afraid to complain.&#xa0;I have a letter  from xxxx from Fownhope Surgery who tells me that she never sends  patients  to the Cardiac Department at Hereford she sends her patients  to Gloucester.  I was sent there  by her some time ago when it was discovered  that I had a heart  problem.&#xa0;xxxx treated Miss xxxxx for many years.  Miss xxxxx problems got worse and eventually  I persuaded her to see Dr. xxxx who said there  was nothing wrong with her stomach.                xxxx notes do not say anything  about what was related to him about the ongoing problem with her stomach.  I was in the room with her when she saw him.               xxxx treated me for stomach pains and being sick.  I lost over two stone. The nurse said I had to go back to see her and she would have a word with her.  She told me that she was treating me for a hiatus hernia.  I  have not got one.&#xa0;Now if this doctor  thinks that she would not use a department at the hospital then it must not be acceptable.&#xa0;I  note that the Ombudsman was set up to investigate complaints. What happens  when these complaints are not investigated?&#xa0;The Ombudsman  makes five points about her work. She is failing.&#xa0;1.  One is given a leaflet outlining how to complain and  if not satisfied  to contact the Ombudsman.2.  The excellent service aim is failing.  I cannot  get answers to myquestions.3.  The aim of helping public services  to improve  is a good one.  She must be able to get the public services  to respond  quickly and honestly to people who have had very bad treatment.4.   To make the complaints system  better.  From my experience it could only get better.               Worse would be impossible.5.   I am looking forward  to seeing an improvement.  Hearing from peoplewho one meets around  the place that they have been treated with respect, kindness  and care and honesty.Ann Abraham's report  where she said that "complaint handling across Government is inconsistent, haphazard and unaccountable, operating without any overarching design, overall standards or common performance framework". Etc. Etc.&#xa0;I still believe that it would help to have a member of the public to help to explain some of the problems of those who have been hurt and damaged  by the hospitals.&#xa0;I say this because most of those working in these positions and offices in Whitehall will not have experienced  the same sort of problems  that local Herefordians do.  May I take an example of David Cameron.  When his son was ill he had treatment from the hospital  that would not happen  here.               The treatment he received was correct. We all should be treated in this way.   Had not the treatment been available on the NHS he could and would have gone to aprivate hospital.  Ordinary  people do not have that option.  I cannot see my MPwaiting for over 4 hours in A &amp; E.&#xa0;Ann Abraham states  that there is also a lack of oversight of complaint handling across Government etc. etc.  "not have power to undertake scrutiny...... I do not have the mandate or the mechanisms to provide assurance on complaint handling efficiency and effectiveness.........&#xa0;Something needs to be done.   The Ombudsman  needs to have the ability to get proper answers from hospital etc.  There must be some responsibility taken for not following up complaints.&#xa0;People complain when they are hurt and have been treated badly.  They should be helped. They ought not to have to be threatened by hospitals or ignored. This makes matters worse.&#xa0;I notice that the term "no worthwhile outcome" would come as a result of a complaint.   I  was encouraged to see that some found this statement as insensitive.&#xa0;&#xa0;Secrecy.               The Hospital and the Ombudsman  are aware of all a that I  have said. The injured/family have no idea about what the hospital  replied or what the Ombudsman  said to them.               We, the injured only have a quick rundown of the interpretation of the Ombudsman  of what has been said.               One feels like an outsider.  Even with the Freedom of Information  I never go t to have copies ofthe documents between  them.  I cannot get the Ombudsman  to understand thatI  have not had questions answered nor information  given.&#xa0;October 2013&#xa0;