                            

[[[Written ]]]

[[[evidence submitted ]]]

[[[by Alison Winter]]]

[[[Summary]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Introduction]]]&#xa0;1.   I am an independent human rights activist who has lived and worked as a volunteer on the borders of Burma since 2004. During this time I have been involved in many projects and tried to meet the needs of the people as best I can. The only thing that qualifies me and my colleagues to present our humble opinions to the Committee is our love for the country and peoples of Burma (1), our work for the people and our commitment to Human Rights.2.   In this submission I will attempt to include not only my own opinion but also the opinions of both Burmese activists, inside and outside the country, and other colleagues I have worked alongside from various countries who have a passion for Burma and its people. We will attempt to address some of the questions in the terms of reference that relate to our combined knowledge, experience and opinions. I have also laid out our combined thoughts as to the future of Burma and some suggestions as to how DFID could assist in that.3.

[[[ ]]]  Please read this submission as a series of practical suggestions and ideas compiled ‘from ground level’ as to how Democracy in Burma could be progressed and feel free to use or ignore any part. Many people we come into contact with do not see evidence that the reforms that have been spoken about and the words of the new ruling body of Burma are genuine, however we hope those words can become reality in the lives of the Burmese Public so that a genuine democracy with respect for the rights of its people can be achieved.  

[[[Good Governance and the Rule of Law]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]4.   It is in the best interests of society that good governance is put into place and Institutions are set up that address and respond to the needs of the people as it will enable all people of Burma to participate actively in Government and in the established democratic Institutions. If good governance is not evident, the needs of society will not be addressed and the public will not be afforded the opportunity to participate in a meaningful way in Democratic Institutions.&#xa0;5.

[[[   ]]]Effectively we can say that more than anything else, Burma needs to come under the Rule of Law, not only nationally but internationally, complying with international standards and norms and fulfilling its obligations as signatories to the various conventions that have been signed in its history. In 2012 President Thein Sein stated that: “If rule of law prevails in our society, human rights, liberty and democracy would flourish automatically.” 6.   The goal of a democratic system of government in Burma has not, and currently cannot be realised. The national constitution reserves 25% of seats for unelected military personnel in each of the two houses of parliament, and 30% in local governments. Until the constitution has been changed, no amount of UK government money, projects or programs will bring about a genuine and lasting change. 

[[[The Military’s role in Good Governance ]]]7.   Military and politics should be linked in the area of National Defence: let me be absolutely clear- there is no place for actively serving army personnel to sit in a ‘democratic’ parliament. All departments of the UK Government should be actively working towards a goal of seeing a parliamentary democracy in Burma where there is no military presence.8.   As Burma has no international enemies and no current war with any other country, the State army of Burma should return to barracks and as with every country in a time of peace, should only be called out on exercise, to defend national frontiers or to assist or protect the people of Burma in the event of a natural disaster, such as cyclone Nargis in 2008. Whilst in barracks the army should undergo reforms by being retrained as to their role in a democratic country and should focus on eliminating all elements of impunity. All soldiers should be given clear and strict guidelines as to what they are allowed to do under law, and what constitutes abuse of the people. 9.   I would suggest that The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) are the experts in this field, and would recommend that they be allocated funding from DFID to put together a simple “Code of Conduct” for the Burma Army and education programme, to conduct field missions to ensure that all Burma Army personnel be made aware of this Code of Conduct and understand their obligations under International and National Law. There should be effective punishment procedures outlined to this effect- clearly stating the penalties for ignoring or abusing their power. If DFID allocates funding to the ICRC for this purpose, funding must be enough to make this a nationwide, comprehensive project, perhaps with a view to extending this program to ethnic armies in the future. 10.   We strongly recommend and advise that this be made a priority in DFID’s program, as the army are the main ‘sticking point’ on a practical level currently to advancing towards the goal of democracy and development in Burma. 11.   It is important to recognise that the less educated army personnel are, the easier it is for evil dictators to issue commands that are abusive to the people and break Geneva Conventions. Basic education should be given at the earliest and at every opportunity for these army personnel. They must be paid properly or they will be forced to resort to corruption and steal money from the public under various guises. They must be fed properly, or they will be forced to loot and steal villager’s livestock and crops. This does not mean, however that funding should be allocated as such, this is not a foreign government’s role, but should be addressed by the Burmese governing bodies and be included in army reform.12.   The presence of the military, especially in ethnic areas, should be reduced, rather than as is currently happening in Karen State (among others) where the army is capitalising on the “ceasefire” by reinforcing its troops and building up its camps. There should not be any need for army presence on the streets or in civilian areas. Law enforcement should be in the hands of the police force.

[[[Constitution, Civil Society and Advocacy]]]13.   In 1947 when General Aung San, one of the founding fathers of the Union of Burma and National hero, returned from the UK after discussing constitution change with our government, he stayed up all night and in the morning produced a new constitution. His premise was that we do not need to reinvent the wheel, in other words just take the best and most suitable parts of constitutions already in existence. This is in stark contrast to the current regime who took 16 years to write the current constitution- the longest constitution writing committee in history as far as I know. We hope that Daw Aung San Suu Kyi will proceed more along the lines of her father, Aung San, and we need to support her in this.14.   In this way the Civil Society movement could have a large role to play in advocacy. During the DFID program of 2010-2011 funding civil society, we heard a lot of effective work going on and heard a lot of promotion of civil society. That was refreshing and effective on many levels. In my opinion the funding should be concentrated on advocacy from inside the country. I would suggest that DFID reinstate this program focusing on advocacy projects for Burmese advocates in country. This will aid the constitutional amendment process and encourage more people from civil society to be involved in the process of shaping their country’s future.

[[[Police and Judiciary]]]15.   Burmese society has many elements: among the most important in a political context is the issue of “face”. Being under military dictatorship for so long has created a society in Burma that is very much based on relationships as opposed to rules. This has penetrated the culture in almost every aspect and is the main reason why so much corruption has been allowed to fester in every sphere, and is also the reason why there is space in society for the ‘Rule of Fear’ as opposed to the rule of law.  If society is based on a set of rules there is much less chance for corruption to penetrate.16.   A successful democracy needs an independent, non-corrupt police force in which the public can have trust and confidence.  Ideally a police force should be independent of government, but accountable to government. The MPF, as we clearly saw in the recent race-hate riots in various places across Burma, especially in Myitkyina, are able to act with impunity and free to carry out their duties or not as they so desire. I would again suggest a similar ‘Code of Conduct’ be researched, taught and established within the police force.17.   Burma has many different regions and comprises of majority and minority ethnic groups. Therefore consideration should be given to setting up regional and central police forces which would complement each other.  Ideally law enforcement in each of the ‘States’ should be conducted by members of the ethnic group of that state- i.e.: Karen State should have police officers recruited from the Karen population, etc.&#xa0;18.   We would also suggest that a ‘Police Academy’ should be set up to establish standards and competency, whereby new recruits would be trained and introduced to the standards required of them. We would suggest a grant should be given to see how this can be achieved. &#xa0;19.   Police personnel should be paid a proper salary to ensure there is no need to indulge in corruption. The current system of civilian militia forces should be dismantled within a legal framework systematically. Again the focus should be on education (or re-education). 20.   Anything DFID can do to achieve these goals in a practical way would be welcome.21.   I would refer the IDC and DFID to Andrew Selth’s excellent recent report, “Police reform in Burma: Aims, Obstacles and Outcomes” (2) and his former research. I suggest DFID use this research and expertise in considering how it can aid police and judicial reform and work with the Griffith Institute to that end.22.   Reforming the Judiciary is a huge and complex job, however hopefully the starting of this work should follow governmental, army and police reform. People love to feel pride in their work and job satisfaction, therefore if good governance and incorruptibility are promoted as a source of such pride within the armed forces and MPF the judiciary should follow suite. 23.   Ideally a very important part of judicial reform should be the introduction of a jury system of judgement. We know from many parts of the words that this seems to be the fairest way to conduct trials. Participants should be selected by local immigration officials from every State and Division systematically. This would then deplete the absolute power of a judge and lessen the chances of a corrupt trial.  24.   A system should be introduced whereby judiciary who do not involve themselves in corruption are recognised and rewarded as such and can take pride in their fairness and the principles of law and justice that they uphold. 25.   In March 1988 a student called Phone Maw was murdered by State forces in a Tea shop in Rangoon. This event was one of the catalysts for the student uprising in August of that year. The person appointed to be Investigation Commission Chairman assigned to the case was U Tin Aung Myint Oo. He has been acclaimed since then for revealing truth and fighting for justice. Another example would be U Ko Yu who was a lecturer at the Department of Law, Rangoon Arts and Science University and a well known lawyer and writer since 1960s. He took no legal fee for poor people. Intellectuals, university students and legal professionals honour him as their hero. We would suggest a National award and prize fund be created in honour of one of Burma’s heroes in the sphere of justice and revealing truth, and awarded to members of the legal profession and judiciary on an annual basis by a prize-giving committee. &#xa0;

[[[Government and Other Institutions]]]&#xa0;26.   Over the years, due to many differing human rights abuses, many people in Burma have gone missing. This includes child and adult soldiers, former political prisoners, porters and forced labourers, over the Saffron revolution of 2007 at least a truck load of monks went missing and are yet to be accounted for, trafficked children and countless people who have been ‘disappeared’ over the years. Last month due to extreme flooding in Karen State up to 600 people from Myawaddy area are still alleged to be ‘missing’.&#xa0; 27.   A grant should be given to facilitate the setting up of a Central Institution for missing persons.  This Institution would compile records of missing people – thereby assisting other family members and friends in obtaining relevant information. This is a practical solution and, with the assistance of modern technology, records could be compiled and maintained. &#xa0;28. The setting up of a ‘Truth and Reconciliation Commission’ should be properly researched and considered.  &#xa0;28.   We are aware that one of the means of communication in highlighting human rights abuses in Burma has been by comedians and artists. We can refer back to the United States when the Roosevelt administration brought in measures which endeavoured to address and overcome the problems caused by The Great Depression in America.  The Government set up an Arts Institution with the objective of communicating to the general public their aspirations to overcome the consequences of the Great Economic Depression, and to communicate to its citizens what they were endeavouring to do. 29.   We believe money would be very well spent in setting up or funding an already existing ‘Communications Centre’ or ‘Centre for the Arts’ which could be used by the best artists in Burma to communicate the objectives of democracy. There could also be a children's section for the schools. &#xa0;30.   Apart from looking to the future and democracy in Burma, artists could be given a commission to produce works that depict the history and past sufferings of the Nation – including those who were tortured and those who were murdered in 1988.  Such commission may honour those who died and suffered, and also give comfort to their loved ones. We believe money spent in setting up such a project would be central to promoting democracy in Burma and the participation and confidence of the general public and would clearly address the question as to if these reforms in Burma are genuine.&#xa0;

[[[Practicalities and Staffing]]]&#xa0;32.   A wise man once said to me “never trust a field worker whose feet are not dirty”. DFID should employ people who have a 

[[[genuine love and compassion ]]]for Burma and its people, and have demonstrated such in their previous experience. There must be more field workers and less office staff. Staff should be prepared to ‘go the extra mile’ to meet the needs of the people if necessary and see with their own eyes where and how UK government money is being used. If DFID is doing this- we believe its work will be effective. &#xa0;33.   Finally we would like to thank the Commons Select Committee and the Department for International Development for their work, and for allocating this funding to be used in Democracy and Development in Burma. We really hope that it can help make a difference to the lives of many people.&#xa0;Notes:&#xa0;(1)   For the purpose of this submission when referring to the ‘people of Burma’, I mean anyone born in Burma and by ‘Burmese’ I include all ethnic groups.&#xa0;(2) Available online at: http://www.griffith.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/512379/Regional-Outlook-Paper-44-v.2-Selth.pdf&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;