&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Written evidence submitted by  the Amphibian and Reptile Conservation]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[Trust]]]1.0&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 

[[[Executive Summary]]]1.1              The Green Paper on Biodiversity Offsetting provides a valuable focus for considering biodiversity in the context of planning1.2              While the planning system currently is not fulfilling its potential, this is due to a variety of reasons such as capacity, availability of data and expertise and effectiveness of planning policies.  Biodiversity Offsetting  does not provide the answer to all these issues and focus on this as a ‘silver bullet’ would not be appropriate These other aspects need to be addressed whether or not Offsetting is developed as a land-use planning tool.1.3              It is imperative that Offsetting is applied appropriately within the mitigation hierarchy and that it does not promote inappropriate development nor create perverse incentives to mismanage biodiversity in the wider countryside1.4              The delivery of an effective Offsetting programme will require effective support and resourcing which would benefit from a Mandatory system, or at least one embedded fully into ‘statutorily managed’ processes.  Optional schemes are unlikely to result in sufficient investment in either the management of the necessary processes to  assess and manage offsetting nor create the certainty or quality outcomes needed to ensure no net loss.1.5              The development of a Spatial Plan for biodiversity should be considered and this should include measurable targets relevant to all the biodiversity interests in any area; this should be used to guide all aspects of planning for biodiversity, assist location of potential offsets,  and also be applicable to a wider range of conservation applications1.6              The development of consistent metrics is valuable in quantifying biodiversity loss. However we are concerned about the assessment of ‘equivalence’ and certainly where we may see ‘trading between habitats/ species’1.7              We see that metrics could be applied to species; great crested newts provide a good example to explore this as the application of Offsetting would be controlled by a strict regulatory regime and the metrics developed would need to take very specific account of the species concerned.1.8              It is unclear how long an Offset should last: careful consideration needs to be given to producing a proportionate demand for mitigation to a sufficiently long lasting ‘compensation’; the developed land is in effect lost forever – in perpetuity conservation of Offset areas should be an aim1.9              Offsetting could be applied to ‘indirect effects’ such as increased public pressure eve where the impact of direct land take through development is negligible 1.10              The outcomes of Offsetting need to be assessed. Clear expectations of their contribution need to be identified and monitoring schemes established to achieve this.1.11              Adequate funding and resources need to be put in place not only for the acquisition of land for offsetting, but also the long term management and management of the infrastructure needed to implement, enforce and monitor. Funding needs to be attractive to Offset providers with certainty that they will be able to afford to undertake management. Funding regimes should therefore consider a range of mechanisms with clear developer contributions, but also the identification of appropriate other funds, such as ‘ground rents’, ring-fenced funding  and public funding to ensure all elements of the schemes are adequately funded.2.0              

[[[Overview]]]2.1              The Amphibian and Reptile Conservation Trust is a national wildlife charity dedicated to conserving herpetofauna (reptiles and amphibians).  We manage over 1500ha of nature reserves and provide a lead for national conservation programmes on herpetofauna working with statutory and non-statutory bodies and coordinating volunteer programmes.  We work extensively in policy areas, notably on biodiversity and land-use planning, in country, UK and European forums and have previously provided comments to Environment Audit Committee on wildlife crime.  We are particularly involved at present with issues associated with great crested newts and planning , being on the DEFRA task force dealing with this, and shall be responding individually and through Wildlife &amp; Countryside Link to the Government’s Consultation on the Green Paper on Biodiversity Offsetting. 2.2              Two things are certain: biodiversity has been adversely impacted by development, and development will continue.  The ’Planning Process’ has a significant role to play in mitigating harm to biodiversity and to achieving a net gain in it in status. Hitherto it has not achieved its potential.  Recent discussion on Biodiversity Offsetting has highlighted the need for improvements and has re-opened this debate.  However, this specific mechanism will not provide the ‘silver bullet’ but rather a wider review of the short-comings within the Planning System and a holistic oversight of the needs of biodiversity is needed to reverse the declines.  Offsetting could have a part of play in facilitating development while helping to conserve biodiversity.  Too much reliance on this technique, or focusing on changes solely to address the implementation of Offsetting, though is misplaced.2.3              We offer comments on Biodiversity Offsetting, but will indicate where other changes are needed to provide a system that will enable it to deliver.   We are not fundamentally opposed to a system designed to address a specific need – we would be seriously concerned if the ‘tail started to wag the dog’ and Offsetting became the norm and, worse, the key mechanism for funding/ driving biodiversity conservation.2.4              We shall address this via comments on the Process, the metrics used, the biodiversity outcomes it delivers and the funding and approaches needed for monitoring, assessment and remediation where appropriate.3.0

[[[ ]]]

[[[              ]]]

[[[Process]]]3.1              Offsetting provides a clear imperative to assess and quantify impacts of development on biodiversity.  The need to assess impacts on biodiversity is already inherent within the Planning System – however, while accepting that there will be exceptions to this generalisation, this is often insufficiently administered because of :3.2              Offsetting per se will not fully address these but will:3.3              Offsetting is being marketed as offering ‘off the shelf’ solutions; which are reliant on availability of appropriate Offset areas: we are concerned that Offsets will not be ‘equivalent’ such that they truly address the impacts on biodiversity (ecological and socio-economic)and in a market driven response then ‘the nearest match’ might be deemed sufficient.  Managing ‘supply and demand’ against both uncertainties of development and of being able match an ecological need in the right area could start driving perverse incentives e.g. trading land for funding management of nature reserves, loss of large swathes of land to create highly managed ‘pockets’ of habitat, short term gains for long term losses, loss of characteristic species/ habitats to be replaced by more easily created habitat types3.4              Offsetting has a real risk of creating an expectation that development should be permitted anywhere – in return for replacement elsewhere.  It is imperative both that the Planning System remains robust to following the mitigation hierarchy while in parallel metrics (and pricing) are determined that dissuade inappropriate development  3.5              Mandatory or voluntary?  3.6              We suggest that an effective spatial plan is developed to identify biodiversity interest and identify areas in which offsetting (for different species a n habitats) maybe appropriate. This spatial plan should assist land-use planning, and be consulted as part of the ‘Offsetting process’, but also have a wider ownership for a range of conservation applications.  We would see this as a means to ensure that appropriate, characteristic biodiversity, and the’ right levels’ of this biodiversity, can be identified and its conservation achieved ‘in the right places’. As such these spatial plans would include measurable objectives (‘targets’) for different habitats and species as a check to ensure that all aspects of biodiversity are being conserved/ enhanced.4.0              

[[[Metrics]]]4.1              Developing metrics is a double-edged sword: it provides a level of consistency which, while useful for quantifying impacts and necessary remediation, will not necessarily direct the restoration of the ‘right kind’ of biodiversity’ in the right place.4.2              Cost versus risk: metrics being trialled do make a necessary recognition of risk and of time for re-creation.  However we are concerned that not enough recognition is given to what can be ‘swapped’ for what and that the rules that guide the implementation (e.g about how far things can be moved) aren’t strong enough. While we might see larger amounts of compensation of rare habitats are traded for more common ones, or local biodiversity is compensate distantly, this risks loss of the local and the characteristic and this may not fully compensate for losses.  Might we end up seeing larger amounts of less good habitats being created in ‘cheap’ areas via literal application of offsetting metrics? 4.3              Species Offsetting:4.4              Evaluation of the spatial component and long-term security of biodiversity is an important  consideration in any Offsetting metric.  However where increased conservation management or provision of site protection should not be used to horse-trade as compensation for loss of area or a change of habitat type/ species as this may lead to an overall and irredeemable reduction in biodiversity.4.5              Geographic location: by definition Offsetting is ‘off-site’.  Multipliers within metrics can be used to compensate for movement away from ‘preferred locations’ but these may:4.6              In perpetuity conservation: how long should an Offset last?  What is a reasonable demand on a developer?   What can be expected of an Offset provider?  In assessing an Offset, and the price paid for it, there must be consideration of the mechanisms that ensure long term funding.  While it can be argued that it is unreasonable to expect a developer to fund management in perpetuity, it is equally unreasonable to allow the decline of biodiversity in an Offset area or an Offset provider to underwrite management long term.  The metrics need to define expected quality, etc, and the price needs to reflect the management aims.  There should be no ‘quid pro quo’ reduction in area or quality via the metrics to enable long term management to be achieved (e.g. 10 ha conserved with no management, 7 ha with 5 years management, 1ha if managed in perpetuity).  It is not unreasonable to assume that management costs should be covered ‘in perpetuity’ which in practice has been considered to be around 120 years based on the ’life expectancy’ of any development.4.7              Indirect effects: the indirect effects, e.g. via increased visitor pressure on a European designated site, or minor effects (loss of low biodiversity land or impacts of small developments) should be assessed, possibly via reference to an Offsetting metric.  Calculation of indirect effects may be more difficult and may be better addressed via financial payments to allow ‘on-site’ mitigation (e.g. wardening, creation of alternative green space) or used as contributions to a ‘strategically managed’ Offsetting programme.5.0              

[[[Outcomes]]]5.1              Conservation is a human construct and biodiversity can be considered a ‘societal choice’.  However there needs to be some clearly defined outcomes to ensure consistency of approach.  We believe these should be determined via an iterative ‘top-down’ and ‘bottom-up’ approach that ensure clarity about the extent and characteristic nature of biodiversity across England5.2              We suggest that assessing specific impacts and their local significance, determining location of Offsets and the needs to understand biodiversity in both a planning and a wider context (e.g. understanding the contributions of agri-environment, etc) will be incomprehensible and unworkable if taken forward on a case by case basis.  A well developed, spatially referenced local biodiversity plan, identify species and habitats and having appropriate goal and quantified targets, is needed to provide clarity and consistency.  It will allow appropriate consideration of what is needed, a rationale for different demands in different local areas (and hence perhaps a different pricing structure) and also the necessary framework in which any ‘trading between habitat types’ or choice of location can be assessed.5.3              Offsetting has been termed a “Licence to trash” and evidence from countries involved in Offsetting has shown that it doesn’t always work (e.g. Bull et al 2013) and may simply be a mechanism aiding decline of biodiversity extent and quality. 5.4              One possible outcome of Offsetting is an overall loss of area of habitat an Offsetting by an enhancement in ‘Quality’ (via location [e.g. ‘joining up’] or via management to create a higher value habitat, or though providing site protection).  We would have concern that where this may be considered ‘equivalent’ in the shorter term, that such gains may only be short term.  These areas may be reliant on conservation but benefits will be lost with the cessation of funding  and but the inherent loss of robustness via a reduced area or increased direct/ direct ‘foot-print’ will be in perpetuity – thus resulting in a longer term net loss.5.6              Habitat Banking potentially allows planning for future developments and future adverse impacts on biodiversity.  It may provide the only mechanism to ensure continuity of some habitats/ species that cannot be instantly recreated.  While conceptually sound and encourages a prudent approach longer term this will potentially create a perverse market of ‘trading’ of established habitats that are not identified/ designated for their conservation interests.  Thus ‘existing habitats’ are likely to be used to trade for habitats lost to development.   Various options exist for addressing this, including ‘retiring habitats’ that have been established for over a defined length of time, defining areas that should be excluded from Offsetting on the basis of current status (thereby preventing ‘trashing extant habitats to allow them to be restored for commercial gain) or through a well-developed spatial plan the defines and delineates areas earmarked for Offsetting. 5.7              Consideration needs to be given to allowing remediation of damage or failure to achieve a planned biodiversity outcome, which may be due to factors that could not have been predicted (e.g pollution, invasion by non-native species, prolonged periods of poor weather).5.8              It is imperative that an effective monitoring programme is established so the net impacts on biodiversity resulting from development and Offsetting (in the context of al other measures) are understood.  Monitoring should be a key consideration as ultimately it is only through understanding of the impacts on the biodiversity that the success (or otherwise) of Offsetting can truly be assessed.6.0              

[[[Funding]]]6.1              A key concern is how this will be funded against a stated aim of no additional costs to developers and particularly in the light of the importance of long-term funding needs to ensure management into the future6.2              It needs to be clear who is responsible for what and where the funding should come from.  Funding/ resources need to be found for supporting not only the acquisition of land for Offsetting but also:7.0              

[[[Reference]]]Joseph W. Bull, K. Blake Suttle, Ascelin Gordon, Navinder J. Singh and E. J. Milner-Gulland (2013). Biodiversity offsets in theory and practice. Oryx, 47, pp 369-380. http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&amp;aid=8956433&#xa0;&#xa0;14 October 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;