&#xa0;&#xa0;Written evidence from the Highways Agency Trade Union Side (SRN 012) This submission is made by the Highways Agency Trade Union Side (HATUS).  The HATUS is made up of the Public and Commercial Services Union (PCS) and Prospect Union. The two unions represent staff at all grades below the Senior Civil Service in the Highways Agency including members in the Traffic Officer Service. In the notice for the inquiry the Committee asked How should the Highways Agency be reformed to make it “the world’s leading highway operator”?; and  How will the policies set out in the Government’s “Action for Roads” command paper improve the strategic road network for all road users, whilst also improving the environment?  In this submission we set out our views on those two points.Summary&#xa0;The HATUS are opposed to the intention set out in “Action for Roads” to change the status of the Agency from an Executive Agency to an as yet undefined publicly-owned company (PubCo). &#xa0;We do not believe that a change in status is required to improve the efficiency of the Agency and that PubCo is the final staging post to privatisation of the strategic road network in England. &#xa0;Privatisation will inevitably lead to tolling of major routes which will have a detrimental impact on the environment, road safety and local economies.

[[[How should the Highways Agency be reformed to make it “the world’s leading highway operator”? ]]]1.              In the foreword to “Action for Roads”, the Secretary of State maintains that reform of the Agency is required and that “more certainty, clearer instructions and less political interference will mean greater efficiency, better service to motorists and the environment.”  2.              To substantiate this, there is much reliance on the fact that the current Non-Executive Chairman of the Agency, Alan Cook, in his independent 2011 report “A Fresh Start for the Strategic Road Network” recommended a change in status for the Highways Agency. However, any decision on this was postponed to allow time for a feasibility study announced by the Prime Minister in late 2011 to look at alternative ownership and financing options. This was made clear in the Government’s response to the Cook report published in May 2012. The then Secretary of State said “I do not propose to make any decisions on the need to change the Agency's status ahead of the feasibility study concluding”.3.              The outcome of this feasibility study has not been published. Instead “Action for Roads” contains the unsubstantiated claim that a change in status of the Highways Agency is the only way to deal with a number of barriers to efficiency as summarised in Chapter 4 figure 4.1 of the document.4.              We disagree that a change in status of the Agency as suggested is the answer. We believe that greater efficiencies can be delivered through full implementation of the recommendations first made in “Better Government Services – Executive Agencies in the 21st Century” published by HM Treasury in 2002. That was “to ensure agencies have three-year funding agreements and full end year flexibility” over this funding period.&#xa0; &#xa0;5.              Greater autonomy from the central department was the reason why the Agency was first created in 1994. It was formed as part of the government’s “Next Steps” programme that began in 1988. The stated aim of that programme was to ensure that executive functions of government should be carried out as far as possible by units clearly designated within departments. A key element was to use private sector and more commercial approaches to deliver public services. &#xa0;6.              Common features of Next Steps agencies were:&#xa0;●Clearly defined tasks aims and objectives;●Key performance targets;●A chief executive; and ●An emphasis on customer service.&#xa0;These are the same objectives set out in “Action for Roads”.&#xa0;7.              The original framework document (published 1 April 1994) stipulated that the Agency would be responsible for managing and maintaining the trunk road and motorway network as well as managing and delivering agreed programmes of new and improved schemes aimed at removing bottlenecks. That same framework concluded that ministers would remain responsible for overall policy on trunk roads in England and by extension the size and shape of work programmes set for the Agency. &#xa0;8.              The Highways Agency was subject to a “Next Steps” review in 1999. It concluded that the Agency had made considerable progress in improving efficiency over the first five years of its existence, had successfully switched focus to become a network operator in line with the then Government policy set out in the White Paper&#xa0; “A New Deal for Trunk Roads in England” published in July 1998, and had introduced innovative cost saving measures such as value engineering. &#xa0;9.              The review concluded that&#xa0; greater efficiencies might be achieved if there was greater clarity in the respective roles of the Agency and the central department; if better use was made of external Board members; and if a measure of performance was introduced that did not rely solely on quantified targets for maintenance and construction. The suggestion was also made that a service level agreement for the road network with some form of independent roads’ inspector to monitor it could usefully be established. &#xa0;&#xa0;10.              A wider government review of all executive agencies undertaken in 2002 reached similar conclusions – that the Agency was efficient but that the working relationship between the Agency and the department and the lack of definition of roles and accountability was a barrier to greater efficiency. This same issue was identified by the Nichols report of 2007 (Review of Highways Agency’s Major Roads Programme) which found &#xa0;“There is some Confusion regarding accountabilities, roles and responsibilities between the Department for Transport (DfT), the Highways Agency (HA) and the regional bodies; and responsibilities for the TPI (Targeted Programme of Improvements) are split within both DfT and HA. HA is stated to be responsible for delivery but, because of increasing costs, DfT staff increasingly intervene. Given the size of the forward investment programme, these arrangements must urgently be clarified and enhanced. …….with the DfT taking on a stronger strategy and sponsor role, and HA becoming more clearly responsible for delivery.”&#xa0;11.              So there is long standing common consensus that greater efficiency could be achieved if the Agency had more freedom than it currently enjoys, and if there was greater surety of funding. &#xa0;12.              All of this can be achieved without changing the status of the Agency. As we now have fixed parliaments there is no reason why a five year funding agreement could not be put in place from 2015. We recognise that such surety of funding will mean that the department will have less flexibility to meet its departmental expenditure limit, but if there is robust governance of budgets across the department this should not present an insurmountable problem.&#xa0;&#xa0;14.              “Action for Roads” makes two new claims for inefficiency that have not previously been identified. These are that government regulations around procurement and contract management make the Agency less efficient and that civil service pay restraint makes it difficult to attract suitable staff.&#xa0;15.              It is not clear how changing status would overcome either of these barriers. As a public company the Agency would still be bound by public procurement rules and its contract management arrangements would still be subject to scrutiny by the National Audit Office, Public Accounts Committee and the Transport Select Committee. The current contract arrangements that the Agency follows were largely driven by recommendations made by all of these bodies.16.              Similarly, all public sector pay is subject to restraint and we doubt that an exception would be made for the Agency. No evidence is provided to substantiate the claim that the Agency finds it hard to compete for staff on the international labour market. Has it tried? We do agree that pay constraints are an issue and our concerns previously provided to the Select Committee to its inquiry on the work of the Highways Agency remain (Eighth Report of Session 2002-03 HC453). Low pay does impact adversely on morale, and anecdotal evidence from our members is that many experienced staff are contemplating early retirement as a result. 17.              HATUS believe that the real intention behind changing the status of the Agency is to make it easier to privatise it in future. Alan Cook confirmed this in a recent interview with a national newspaper. &#xa0;18.              Privatisation will only be possible if a revenue stream can be created. The most obvious means to achieve this is to levy tolls. The Department for Transport announced a pilot project on 2 October 2013 to place a network of sensors along a 50-mile stretch of the A14 to create a smart road that can monitor traffic by sending signals to and from mobile phones in moving vehicles. As reported in the Guardian newspaper this is seen as a first step in building the infrastructure for charging motorists to use busy roads. &#xa0;19.              Tolls are not popular in the UK and all the evidence is that they do not work. Part of the problem is the availability of diversionary routes. The road network in England is well connected and built to a high density. A report issued by consultants Atkins in November 2012 found that tolls on the A14 could result in up to 35 per cent of traffic using the existing road being diverted onto other local roads. Most traffic congestion occurs on local roads rather than the strategic network so this sort of shift will see severe environmental impacts.&#xa0; 20.              The one major toll road already built through private investment – the M6 toll in the West Midlands opened in 2003 has proved a disaster both as an investment and as a relief road (its original purpose). As well as losing money the scheme did not avoid the need for further public investment because traffic continued to use the alternative M6 which has recently been improved by the Agency in an attempt to alleviate congestion.&#xa0;21.              Motorists are a highly vocal campaign constituency and are unlikely to accept widespread tolling of existing routes. When proposals for road pricing were put forward in 2007, over 1.8 million people signed a petition against the proposal. This remains a record for an on-line petition. In a Daily Telegraph poll taken in 2012 over 80% of participants rejected the question “can privatised roads get Britain moving again”&#xa0;22. The likelihood is that any form of direct charging for access to the strategic road network will result in diversion of traffic to other “free” routes. This will be bad for safety, bad for the environment and bad for local economies.

[[[How will the policies set out in the Government’s “Action for Roads” command paper improve the strategic ]]]

[[[road network for all road users, whilst also improving the environment?]]]23.              The language used throughout “Action for Roads” is disappointing. The environment seems very much an afterthought.  The focus is on providing more road space, quicker and cheaper, turning the clock back to the late 1980s/early 1990s when predict and provide were the watchwords. There is no recognition of the 1994 SACTRA report into induced traffic, the threat posed by climate change, or the impact of traffic-generated poor air quality.24.              There seems to be an acceptance by the department that traffic volumes will grow at least in line with predictions; and that the challenge is to provide a strategic road network to cater for this. As long ago as 1997 the Agency recognised that this was not sustainable. We are therefore disappointed that there is no mention in “Action for Roads” of modal shift or reducing car dependency. &#xa0;25. Climate change, if unchecked, will have a devastating effect on our environment and hence economy. In our opinion the major task of the department is to fundamentally change our transport systems; to move them from being run on fossil fuels to ones running on sustainable, clean energy; for public transport to be really accessible to all the public, not only in terms of coverage and capacity but in terms of price; public transport must be cheap enough for all to use. If these things are done then it will boost the UK's long-term economic growth.  &#xa0;26. The Strategic road network is vitally important to the economy and the way that it is managed can, and should, have a major impact on the UK meeting the targets set out in the Climate Change Act. Why for example is there no mention of traffic speed in “Action for Roads”? Managed motorways could be used to manage speed to both reduce fuel consumption and noxious emissions. &#xa0;27. It remains the case that more deaths are caused by transport-related air pollution than by road traffic accidents. As the House of Commons Environmental Audit Committee report on Air quality published in March 2010 stated in the summary:&#xa0;“Poor air quality reduces the life expectancy of everyone in the UK by an average of seven to eight months and up to 50,000 people a year may die prematurely because of it.” ……. “Transport causes the most exposure to harmful air pollutants, and air quality targets will not be met without a significant shift in transport policy.” &#xa0;Roads policy should not therefore be treated in isolation from policies on demand management, land-use planning, public transport and future technologies. Any policy which diverts traffic from the strategic road network onto the local road network should not be contemplated. Transforming the Highways Agency into a PubCo is such a policy.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;October 2013&#xa0;              6 of 6