&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;Written evidence from the Civil Engineering Contractors Association (CECA) (SRN 021)&#xa0;The Civil Engineering Contractors Association (CECA) welcomes the opportunity to respond to the above named call for evidence. CECA provides the voice for those companies who create, improve and maintain the UK’s vital transport and utility networks. Our membership of more than 300 companies, together delivers an estimated 70-80 per cent of all infrastructure construction work carried out nationwide. Our industry supports the employment of around 200,000 people with annual activity worth up to £25 billion.CECA members have been involved in the delivery of the overwhelming majority Highways Agency projects since its inception, and many are also engaged in the Agency’s maintenance work. As a result CECA and its membership have a strong relationship with the Highways Agency. CECA believes that that the Committee’s inquiry is extremely timely given the publication of the recent Spending Round, and the Government’s command paper Action for Roads: A network for the 21st century.CECA is supportive of proposals to provide certainty of investment in the roads sector. We have long argued that contractors can only provide maximum efficiency where they have good visibility of their forward programme of work. All too often the roads sector has suffered from boom-and-bust conditions that are hugely damaging to the on-going smooth delivery of projects.The proposals announced this summer offer the potential to resolve this issue once and for all. They will help our industry to dramatically improve the efficiency of delivery, which in turn will allow our economy to grow and quicken journey times. However, with less than two years until the General Election, it is vital there is no delay in implementing the legislation required to make sure this happens. This will enable civil engineering contracting companies to confidently plan for future work and ensure that all the projects announced are delivered on time and to budget. In our response, we have focused on the areas in which we believe we can add the most value. We trust that you find our comments helpful and that they will be taken into consideration.

[[[How will the policies set out in the Government’s Action for Roads command paper improve the strategic road network for all road users, whilst also improving the environment?]]]Benefits of investment in the road networkAs we have said in our covering letter, the Civil Engineering Contractors Association (CECA) is  supportive of proposals to provide certainty of investment in the roads sector. The proposals ensure that the road network continues to play a key role in the UK’s transport system and continues to provide real and direct economic benefits to businesses, workers and consumers. The plans strongly acknowledge that good connections support our towns and cities and strengthen the country as a whole. As the economy grows, our population rises and our vehicles become more fuel efficient, it is likely that traffic in many areas will increase. CECA believes that Action for Roads: A network for the 21st century is vital in ensuring a UK road network that is fit for purpose. Failures of the road network increases costs to, and journey times for, drivers and industry. They restrict employment opportunities and make it harder to do business in the UK. In recent decades we have been falling behind other countries in terms of roads investment, road building and maintenance. The UK ranks 28th in the world for the overall quality of infrastructure, according to the World Economic Forum and 28th for roads, behind many other developed countries. Road congestion costs our economy £8bn each year. A report commissioned by CECA from the Centre for Economics and Business Research (CEBR) found that UK GDP could have been five per cent higher, on average, each year between 2000 and 2010 if our infrastructure had matched that of other leading global economies. Furthermore, the research also found that the cost of the UK having infrastructure which fell short of typical developed economy standards was £78 billion each year between 2000-10.Road maintenance is as essential as building new roads and increasing capacity. The £6 billion announced in Action for Roads: A network for the 21st century to resurface over 3,000 miles of the network will reduce journey times, accidents and lower insurance costs for motorists At the same time the work will provide entry level jobs and training opportunities for many, including those not in employment, education or training (NEETs). CECA predicts that an additional £1 billion of consistent investment in highways over the coming five years would create an estimated 6,600 jobs in construction, including 330 – 400 apprentices. It is estimated that the same additional investment would create more than 20,000 jobs in total across the wider economy, boosting total economic activity by more than £14 billion.CECA believes that there is a clear need for an investment strategy and road network to enable the UK to compete on a global scale. If we fail to bring UK infrastructure up to the standard of other developed economies, by 2026 this could create an annual loss to the economy of £90 billion.

[[[Efficiencies and cost saving]]]Long term funding and visibility delivers greater efficiency for contracting companies and the public sector, better value for the tax payer and a better outcome for drivers. CECA estimates that the initial value of this increased efficiency could be between 5 and 10 per cent of the current cost of maintaining and improving the network, with considerable further gains available through continuous improvement over time. This figure is in line with other parts of industry where greater commitment and visibility are available.Based on existing research and discussions with members, we believe that longer term certainty of investment would have the following benefits:The key factor associated with this is certainty, as suppliers are much more likely to invest to drive efficiency if they are certain that their business will deliver some of this future work. As such, it is essential that greater visibility is aligned to more certain forms of supplier appointment, such as the use of Early Contractor Involvement and long term framework contracts where suppliers have greater confidence of work. 

[[[Motorways and A Roads]]]The command paper states that a further 221 lane miles of extra capacity will be added to our busiest motorways. Managed motorways have been in operation in some parts of the UK since 2005. CECA members believe that Managed Motorways have become an effective means of delivering significant capacity improvement in times of economic restraint. CECA also supports proposals to treat the most important A roads as expressways and roll this standard out across key parts of the strategic road network. Given the widespread perception of the quality of motorways in the UK, the move to expressways - which will benefit from the high standards of safety and performance in the way expected of motorways - is extremely welcome. Impact on local roadsCECA believes that care must be taken to ensure that the developments announced in Action for Roads: A network for the 21st century do not result in increased congestion on local roads. While we welcome the announcements made, there remains some concern that increased capacity on the strategic road network will result in increased congestion where the network meets local roads. For this reason we welcome the government’s commitment to also invest in key local road improvement schemes through devolved local major transport project funding. However, efforts should be made to understand where any future local road congestion may arise, with funding put in place to address this.It is also important to note that no specific details have been given as to where the £6 billion will be spent to provide maintenance services to local highways. Without effective maintenance, further pressure will be placed on the vital local roads network. The environment CECA believes that our industry must continue to have the support of the wider public for its activities. This support will only be sustained if we show an enduring commitment to the delivery of roads that support carbon reduction and wider environmental objectives. To achieve this, industry must work closely with all those affected by change.CECA has long supported the case for Low Emission Vehicles (LEVs) and welcomes the Government’s continued focus on ultra-low emission vehicles to reduce air pollution as well as to combat climate change. In order for this vision to be realised, it is essential that cross-party support for the wider roll-out of this infrastructure is maintained. 

[[[What mecha]]]

[[[nisms are there for Government to increase investment in strategic roads and attract new investors? Are there good examples from other countries that could be applied in the UK?]]]We remain concerned that there is no long term strategy as to where the announced funding will come from. CECA supports other industry bodies including the CBI in calling for public debate about how to fund the construction of the roads the UK needs to stay competitive.Furthermore, CECA members believe that there needs to be greater consistency in infrastructure policy. Strategic decision-making on infrastructure projects cannot be impacted by the electoral cycle if it is to be effective in the longer term. Recent months have seen both the Government and Opposition take steps to consider how such long term certainty can be provided. Successful infrastructure planning requires a decision-making horizon of at least 25 to 30 years. Creating an independent body - as suggested by Sir John Armitt in his recent report - on a statutory basis would enable infrastructure planning to formulate policy on a cross-party basis in the national interest and create an attractive market for investors.

[[[How should the Highways Agency be reformed to make it “the world’s leading highway operator”? What ]]]

[[[roles should Government and the private sector play to ensure better management of the strategic road network?]]]CECA strongly supports the current work of the Highways Agency, believing it to be an exemplar of best practice in the public sector for many of its activities. CECA believes that provision of greater independence for the Highways Agency will be vital in dividing the functions of delivery and strategy to enable complete focus on constructing an effective road network strategy. CECA members have a long history of effective engagement with the Highways Agency in its current form. We expect this good relationship to continue and strengthen in the future.&#xa0;October 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; CBI, March 2012 http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-17423693   Securing our economy: The case for infrastructure, May 2013 http://www.ceca.co.uk/media/103459/ceca_cebr_report_-_securing_our_economy_the_case_for_infrastructure_-__may_2013.pdf  Ibid. The Armitt Review: An independent review of long term infrastructure planning commissioned for Labour’s Policy Review, September 2013 http://www.yourbritain.org.uk/uploads/editor/files/The_Armitt_Review_Final_Report.pdf