&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;1.1              Kent County Council (KCC), as the Local Transport Authority for Kent, welcomes the opportunity to submit written evidence to this inquiry on the Strategic Road Network. We would be very happy to expand on any aspect either in writing or as oral evidence.   &#xa0;1.2              In making this response KCC wishes to express its full endorsement of the response made to this Committee by the South East Local Transport Board (SELTB). Medway Council and East Sussex County Council also fully support this submission.  &#xa0;1.3                KCC’s submission of evidence can be summarised as follows:&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;1.4              Kent County Council recommends to the committee that action is taken by the Government to: &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;2.1              The Public Inquiry for the A21 Tonbridge to Pembury dualling scheme was held between 14 May and 9 July 2013, the outcome of which is expected in late 2013 or early 2014. The Public Inquiry was due to be held three years earlier in July 2010, but was cancelled due to the 2010 Spending Review. If the Secretary of State rules in favour of the scheme it could be delivered in the next Spending Review Period, however, delivery is by no means certain, which is extremely disappointing given that this scheme is key to addressing the transport challenges in West Kent. &#xa0;2.2              Cutting congestion and improving journey time reliability along the A21 corridor is a key element of KCC’s transport delivery plan Growth without Gridlock. The current Local Transport Plan (2011-2016) refers to the economic harm that KCC believes has been caused by delay to the dualling of the A21 between Tonbridge and Pembury. The County Council recognises that this is a priority project for Kent, yet it has been delayed due to the weaknesses in how Government plans, funds and delivers improvements to the Strategic Road Network.&#xa0;2.3              KCC has evidence that delivery by the Local Transport Authority, i.e. Kent County Council, would have resulted in completion of the scheme at a lower cost. KCC is therefore advocating that the reforms to the Highways Agency (HA) include provision for future scheme delivery by Local Transport Authorities, where it can be demonstrated that this would provide improved efficiency and value for money.   &#xa0;2.4              KCC conducted a cost review of the A21 Tonbridge to Pembury dualling scheme which has led us to believe that it could have been delivered for around 20% less than the HA. This example therefore demonstrates how future schemes could be delivered for lower cost by Local Transport Authorities. In KCC’s review of the HA’s proposal for the A21 scheme (Option A), we explored three alternative options; Options B, C and D with each having its own programme. The cost differences between KCC’s Options B and C and the HA’s scheme are primarily fees associated with the different statutory approval routes and inflation associated with the relative timescales. Our third option, D, would involve major changes to the scheme and it would need to be progressed through the Nationally Significant Infrastructure Projects (NSIP) process through the Planning Inspectorate. The alternative options are summarised as follows:&#xa0;•              Option B would have involved minor changes to the HA scheme and assumed that KCC could have delivered the scheme as agent to the HA under a Section 6 Agreement.&#xa0;•              Option C also involved minor changes to the HA scheme with additionally de-trunking the road to enable KCC to become the Highway Authority and then deliver the scheme to benefit from exemption from VAT. KCC does not pay VAT on its own highway schemes, but to achieve this, the A21 would need to be de-trunked. De-trunking could also be of benefit considering that many other ‘A’ roads that fulfil a similar function are successfully managed by the Local Transport Authority.&#xa0;•              Option D would have involved a completely fresh start, comprising fundamental design changes and the de-trunking of the A21, with the transfer of management responsibility to the Local Transport Authority. The scheme would also have needed to be progressed through the NSIP process. This option demonstrates that significant cost savings could have been made. Our review showed that a number of design elements and concessions made by the HA are over generous. Our provisional analysis shows that substantial savings could have been made on a number of fronts, including: tightening the design to keep more to the existing alignment; using more of the existing highway; woodland replacement; earthworks; footway and side-road provision. These savings would have needed to be fully developed at detailed design stage but suggest that potential savings could have been made on the HA’s scheme. &#xa0;2.5              In summary, KCC has identified overall cost savings on the HA scheme through a review of:&#xa0;KCC can provide more in depth evidence to support the above if required.              2.6              The example of the A21 Tonbridge to Pembury dualling scheme demonstrates the way in which the work of the HA has led to increased cost estimates. This results in poor financial management and a high risk of non-delivery. Without KCC challenging the HA on their costs, we believe that the A21 Tonbridge to Pembury dualling scheme would not still be a live scheme today. A new way forward is needed for all future high capital cost projects. There is now the opportunity with the Government’s proposed reforms of the HA and the management of the Strategic Road Network to allow Local Transport Authorities to deliver major road schemes. KCC believes this will result in greater efficiencies, value for money and delivery of more schemes that are vital for economic growth.&#xa0;&#xa0;3.1              The Department for Transport (DfT) Circular 02/2013 ‘The Strategic Road Network and the Delivery of Sustainable Development’ section 40 states that “where the strategic growth test cannot be met there will be no additional junctions with, or direct means of access to, motorways and other routes of motorway standard other than for the provision of signed roadside facilities for road users, maintenance compounds and, exceptionally, major transport interchanges.” &#xa0;3.2              This policy prevents the construction of a new Junction 5a on the M2 which would provide the Kent Science Park with direct motorway access and open up the area for further employment. Although Section 39 of Circular 02/2013 states that “where appropriate, proposals for the creation of new junctions or direct means of access may be identified and developed at the Plan-making stage in circumstances where it can be established that such new infrastructure is essential for the delivery of strategic planned growth”; the Local Planning Authority has not been able to include the Kent Science Park as a strategic site due to the uncertainty of being able to deliver the new motorway junction and a full link road to the A2, which current policy interpretation would require. &#xa0;3.3              The risk to the Local Planning Authority of including this as a strategic site to enable a new motorway junction would be that their Local Plan is found unsound on the basis that the considerable cost of the motorway junction and link road is unlikely to come forward in the plan period. A relaxation of this policy however, would enable construction of a partial junction and a slip road.  &#xa0;3.4              KCC therefore advocates that policies concerning new junctions on the Strategic Road Network are relaxed to allow the delivery of schemes that would stimulate development, economic growth and job creation; thus allowing the Strategic Road Network to play its full part in supporting regeneration and economic prosperity.&#xa0;&#xa0;4.1              The example of the proposed new Lower Thames Crossing, the corridor options of which were recently consulted on by the DfT, demonstrates how investment in strategic roads could be increased through attracting new investors. KCC has held extensive discussions with North American private sector investors who regularly finance large scale tolled roads projects and are keen to be involved in the delivery a new Lower Thames crossing. They firmly hold the view that this scheme could be delivered at no cost to the public purse and are hungry for such opportunities.&#xa0;4.2              Initial discussions with North American private sector investors indicated that they would want a realistic assessment of what is achievable in terms of finances; and the structure of a scheme delivery deal needs to marketable to the private sector. A 25 year concession is too short and would almost certainly require re-financing, as would a 30 year concession. A 50 year concession was preferred. &#xa0;4.3              It is vital that the new and existing crossings are linked as the existing toll income would be required to finance the debt incurred from construction of the new crossing. The private sector would want flexibility to increase tolls, possibly by inflation to achieve a minimum coverage ratio of debt. Their preference would be for toll increases to be determined independent of Government in order to remove political interference. Surety of costs is vital for private financiers, as without that, the risks make a proposal very difficult. However, a new Lower Thames crossing guarantees investors a rate of return from day one of opening. To give greater guarantee of cash flow in the first 5 years, it was advised that inflation +2% would be preferred due to the usual tight margins and to allow for mitigation of risk. &#xa0;4.4              KCC spoke to one particular infrastructure investor, a world leader in developing infrastructure investment as an asset class for institutional investors, who have a proven track record in identifying, investing and managing infrastructure investments around the world. They see a new Lower Thames Crossing as similar to the Golden Ears Bridge across the Fraser River in Vancouver, Canada, which opened in 2009 at a cost of $808 million (£509 m). It is an all-electronic tolled highway with 2011 toll revenue amounting to $38 million (£23.94 m). It is financed by a 35 year concession.&#xa0;4.5              This investor indicated that they would expect the price of equity to be between 8-9% without construction risk; 11-17% with construction risk; 11-14% with toll risk (where the private sector takes the traffic volume risk and not the Government). In order to make the debt financing work, an ‘availability payment’ would reduce the toll risk and therefore the cost of equity. The Government would keep all toll income and guarantee the private funders a minimum revenue return. They stressed that as the principle of tolling the Thames at this location (outer London) had been established, a dual crossing network would be very attractive to investors and this would reduce the cost of the equity. A crossing located away from the existing location (Dartford-Thurrock) would be preferred by investors to maximise future growth opportunity and ensure network resilience (and hence revenue streams). The concession would need tolling flexibility and 50 year duration, with potential for re-financing. &#xa0;4.6              They also suggested building in performance measures based around journey time reliability, user satisfaction, safety, etc, into concession arrangements. They indicated that there would be no dramatic difference between a tunnel and a bridge in terms of debt finance. Whilst the risks associated with tunnelling are higher than for a bridge they are not significant. The geotechnical data is essential to mitigating these. Once all risks are known an advisor would help structure the deal. Long term revenue income is essential to funding infrastructure investment; although immediate yield is also important, i.e. revenue from existing tolling.&#xa0;4.7              The KCC experience with the North American investment sector clearly demonstrates how investment in strategic roads could be achieved through attracting overseas private sector investors for toll road schemes such as a new river crossing, and thus deliver vital national road infrastructure without the need for public funding. KCC strongly advocates that the Government takes a proactive roll in entering into negotiations with private sector investors to fund large scale projects essential to the future growth of the UK economy.  &#xa0;&#xa0;5.1              KCC has made the case that the over estimation of costs by the Highways Agency for delivery of major road projects, as demonstrated by the A21 Tonbridge to Pembury dualling scheme, affects affordability, value for money, and risks scheme delivery. KCC advocates that future schemes on the Strategic Road Network could be delivered more efficiently and cost effectively by Local Transport Authorities. &#xa0;5.2              KCC has illustrated how policies that govern the Strategic Road Network are preventing the delivery of schemes that would otherwise stimulate development, economic growth and job creation, as demonstrated by the inability to deliver a new Junction 5a on the M20 to access the Kent Science Park. KCC advocates that there needs to be greater flexibility to allow the Strategic Road Network to support regeneration and economic prosperity.&#xa0;5.3              KCC has provided examples of North American investors, interested in constructing and operating a new Lower Thames Crossing, to show how private sector investment in the UK’s strategic roads could deliver schemes that improve the Strategic Road Network and deliver economic growth.&#xa0;5.4              Kent County Council therefore recommends to the committee that action is taken by the Government to allow local delivery of major road schemes; provide greater flexibility in current policy governing Highways Agency procedures; and take a more proactive approach to attract private sector funding to deliver schemes that improve the Strategic Road Network. &#xa0;&#xa0;October 2011&#xa0;