&#xa0;Written evidence from Suffolk Coastal District Council (SRN 031)How does the Government’s policy for roads link with planning for other transport modes?The evidence from the recent process in regard to the planning for the A14 toll road in Cambridgeshire indicates that the HA has taken no account whatsoever of the strategic relevance or impact of this major scheme, relating it to and presenting it solely as a local congestion relief scheme for the Cambridge and Huntingdon area. As evidence of the Government’s policy in action, it is appears to indicate that the policy environment is not fit for purpose. This is not inconsistent with previous episodes in relation to the HA and other issues on the A14. Examples are the difficulties some 6 or 7 years ago in relation to ‘Operation Stack’, the process to accommodate HGVs and reduce congestion on the A14 in the event of closure of Felixstowe Port. The HA’s approach was exceedingly ineffective in relation to the feasibility of various options, especially in respect to the impact on local roads and communities. A workable solution was eventually found, almost entirely from the input and efforts of Suffolk County Council, Suffolk Coastal District Council, the Port of Felixstowe and the police. Government policy, as evidenced by the HA’s approach appeared to be based on the concept of the Trunk Road being a separate and standalone entity,  unrelated to local circumstances. Similar considerations applied to the design of improvement at Dock Spur Roundabout Felixstowe and the Copdock Interchange. The designs in those cases, while performing excellently in their core role, were not permitted to take into account possible related improvements on the immediately adjoining roads.Other examples could be quoted, but these are sufficient to indicate that there needs to be a fundamental rethink of the approach to integrating policy and opportunities on the trunk and local road systemsHow should the Highways Agency be reformed to make it “the world’s leading highway operator”? What roles should Government and the private sector play to ensure better management of the strategic road network?The HA appears to operate in total isolation from all other local agencies, let alone communities. Many other government agencies, for example, The Environment Agency and Natural England, and many others, have moved an enormous distance over recent years in correcting previously similar, although none as extreme, stances. The HA however seems impervious to such evolutions. The HA also appears to have no concept whatsoever of cost-effectiveness. The design standards for trunk roads such as the A14 have over the past decade become more and more stringent and grandiose, meaning that schemes conceived for example a decade ago, become hugely more expensive, or indeed unaffordable, when reworked “to modern standards”. What the country needs are many new or updated roads, implemented in a much more modest and cost-effective way, so allowing many more schemes to be actually implemented, and hence greatly improving the collective ‘return on investment’ for the government (or indeed other funding sources).An example of this was the implementation of the long and desperately needed improvement at Haughley, on the A14 near Stowmarket. The new interchange built there, for a minor local road, was of a standard which would do justice to a full motorway junction at a major interchange for a big city. The land take alone was extravagant in comparison to the original, entirely satisfactory, interchanges dating from the A14’s original construction in the 1980s. The HA’s project management has certainly never impressed with its apparent cost-effectiveness. The installation of the overhead sign system along the A14 was most welcome. But the time taken (around two years) was hard to understand. Indeed, after many months of construction of the ducting etc, and the signs themselves, they stood unused for approaching a year before being commissioned and coming into use. Also, when it was suggested to the HA, that, if it was necessary to construct the data and power ducts for the length of the A14, there could be an opportunity to offer capacity in those ducts to telecoms providers or others, and procure thereby an income stream, the suggestion appeared to shock the HA representative as being utterly inappropriate. The HA should, be required to operate with the same degree of cost effectiveness and efficiency that has been forced on Local Authorities and other government departments.Similarly, it should be required to undertake a fundamental revision of its policy and approach in relation to local agencies and communities – the concept known elsewhere as ‘localism’. Again the recent process in respect of the A14 toll road has illustrated how out of touch it is – to the point where place names on the consultation leaflet are actually incorrect. (Brampton shown as Ellington, in addition to the real Ellington on the other side of the A1).DfT Circular 02/2013: THE STRATEGIC ROAD NETWORK AND THE DELIVERY OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT states: Operating an effective and efficient strategic road network makes a significant contribution to the delivery of sustainable economic growth, helping to create the conditions that support the realisation of the aspirations of businesses and communities, and is a key deliverable for the Highways Agency in meeting its remit of delivery partner to national economic growth. The recent A14 proposals are completely contrary to this statement. We have major concerns about the way the consultation was presented as well the possible consequences of the tolling proposals. The consultation is presented as a local congestion issue in Cambridge / Huntingdon and this view is clearly evidenced by the exhibitions all being local to that area. The regional, let alone national, aspects are mentioned only in passing and the so-called "Alternative Routes" are only remotely relevant or practical for local traffic, and only light vehicles. We therefore challenged the consultation and proposals at the most fundamental level. In summary, the HA should undergo a fundamental review of its role, structure and governance to bring it into line with current standards and policies.&#xa0;October 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;