&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by the Chief Scientific Adviser to HM Government (CLC0066)]]]You wrote to David Willetts with a number of questions about the role of Government scientists in communicating climate science to the general public. It is appropriate that I reply as these are matters that are under my aegis. I attach a note which GO-Science officials have prepared in consultation with Government Departments.&#xa0;Although a clear majority of the public still think the climate is changing, there has been a downward trend in public acceptance of the reality of, and concern about, climate issues. The publication of the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment Report represents an opportunity to reengage the public on the risks of climate change, and on the options for responding to these. Over the coming months I will be attaching considerable priority to engaging with the public on these issues.&#xa0;I will look forward to your committee's report with interest.&#xa0;Role of Government scientists in communicating climate science to the general public – Response to the questions raised in the Committee’s letter to David Willetts MP 30 July 2013. &#xa0;Communication of the science which informs policy matters. Openness and transparency in the policy process should be the default. &#xa0;Scientists are involved in the business of government in a range of ways. These include: &#xa0;&#xa0;For the purpose of this document, we focus on the third of these categories; people doing primary scientific research across government. These scientists are generally employed in relevant non-departmental public bodies (NDPBs) rather than in central ministerial departments. &#xa0;A second important distinction is between communication of the science informing policy and communication of the resulting policy itself. &#xa0;Turning to the points in the letter: &#xa0;The number of scientists working for Government Departments and non-departmental bodies; &#xa0;Latest figures suggest that at 1 April 2013 there were around 14,000 FTE specialist science and engineering posts across government (in ministerial and non-ministerial departments and within their NDPBs). These are posts where relevant science or engineering expertise is an essential requirement. &#xa0;The number of these scientist that are involved in primary research and how many of these work on areas related to climate science; &#xa0;There are no scientists involved in primary research in government departments, other than those departmental Chief Scientific Advisers who maintain a part-time role with a University or other external organisation. In these cases, a “Chinese wall” is maintained between the two roles. In NDPBs: &#xa0;&#xa0;Any rules or guidance for the publication of research in peer review journals by Government employed research scientists; &#xa0;There is a presumption that all research commissioned by departments should be published. As there are no active researchers in central government departments, there is no central guidance on publishing in peer reviewed publications. Some departments have general guidance for publication of research, the purpose of which is to ensure that quality can be assured and that ministers can be kept informed of any upcoming publication. Departments’ policies related to climate change are underpinned by a huge scientific evidence base, which is independently assessed both through the peer-review process and by authoritative assessments from, for example, the IPCC, and other international and national bodies. Research is sourced through sponsorship of relevant NDPBs, provision of support to Research Council led initiatives such as the Ocean Acidification and Arctic Research Programmes led by NERC, and by the letting of commercial contracts to academic groups and consortia such as the recently completed AVOID Programme. DECC requires research undertaken under contract to be submitted for peer-review publication and also to be made available as appropriate in project and programme reports. DECC requires Met Office staff and other funded scientists to operate independently of DECC and that their research and scientific conclusions are not constrained or influenced by the Department. Similarly, these scientists are encouraged to communicate their research to the media and to public audiences. In other NDPBs, there is also a presumption that research is published, and there will be internal guidance on procedures for publication. NDPBs generally ensure their sponsor departments see papers to be submitted for publication, to make sure departments are aware of emerging research from their funded programmes. Sponsor departments are not otherwise involved in the publications process. It is usual in NDPBs for there to be senior manager sign off for any publication, for quality assurance purposes. Any publication with a potentially high level of media interest will be drawn to the attention of relevant departmental officials and press offices to ensure there are ‘no surprises’. &#xa0;Any rules or guidance for scientists discussing or promoting their research and findings through the media and other means; and how these apply to scientists working on climate science. &#xa0;Government departments and NDPBs have guidance on procedures for interactions with the media. Media and press offices have an important role to support and facilitate such interactions. The purpose of such guidance and co-ordination is to: &#xa0;&#xa0;Public servants discussing their science via the media must limit their comments to the science. Nevertheless, questions can sometimes stray into the policy implications of the science and the policy decisions made by Ministers. As set out in the Civil Service Code, it is not appropriate for public servants to discuss policy decisions. This can be a difficult tension to manage and may deter some scientists from engaging in public communication through the media. For this reason, media training for government scientists, and support for them in engaging with the media via press offices and external bodies such as the Science Media Centre, is important, encouraged and increasing. &#xa0;An important feature of the role of Chief Scientific Advisers is that they maintain their professional scientific independence whilst working as civil servants. This is to ensure the impartiality of the scientific advice given to government. The corollary of this independence is that CSAs can have an independent profile in the media with respect to the scientific advice when they deem it necessary. CSAs will use their judgement in deciding whether public engagement or internal discussion alone will have greater impact. &#xa0;Any rules or restrictions for scientists publicly discussing Government policy relevant to their area of research. &#xa0;While policy is under discussion, civil servants, including Chief Scientific Advisers, and government scientists in NDPBs should not advocate a particular policy position over alternatives. CSAs will often publicly discuss the science behind the policy, while recognising that science is just one of a range of evidence and factors in the policy-making process.October 2013&#xa0;