

[[[Submission from Market Dojo]]]&#xa0;1. We realise this a late submission however as a new supplier of procurement tools and as an SME we feel we can lend some useful insights to this subject.&#xa0;2. The following is an excerpt from our successful application to the Technology Strategy Board for a grant to assist public procurement professionals with e-Sourcing activities.&#xa0;3. “Market Dojo currently provides the Private sector with a low cost negotiation tool for running e-Auctions and electronic Request for Quotations. The opportunity in the public sector is the current shortage of a suitable low cost, simple, and above all, compliant electronic quotation and e-auction tool. This proposal addresses a particular problem area where Frameworks have underperformed. The solution will also provide an efficient purchasing tool for sub-OJEU limit tenders. In order to manage the complexities of Public Sector Procurement, through Frameworks for instance, an evolution of the current functionality is required.“&#xa0;4. This project has resulted in a professional, accessible e-Sourcing platform as well as a training tool and an Innovation Portal which one of our clients, East North East Homes Leeds (ENEHL) have been using to obtain, compare and progress ideas from their suppliers.&#xa0;5. We have already had some great successes. For example Bedford Borough Council, (BBC), decided they wanted to negotiate more effectively on local transport and even though other tools were available, our tool offered a simple pay as you go solution with minimal training.&#xa0;6. The Transport team at BBC manage a mainstream school transport contract providing Home to School Transport routes for students unable otherwise to access public transport to educational establishments. This involves a large number of different routes and suppliers. &#xa0;7. BBC’s priority was to find a solution that enabled utilisation of the current framework agreements approved operator (supplier) list.  The chosen option was to run an e-auction event, the first time this type of procurement exercise would be run by the Borough Council.              Market Dojo were chosen to host the in-house event as the solution offered a track record of producing savings from similar home to school e-auction events, a simple user interface and an extremely competitive negotiated rate.  In addition, Market Dojo offered to provide as much support and assistance as required for the tender exercise which was considered essential for BBC undertaking a new procurement initiative. &#xa0;8. The administrative benefits offered by the software were realised throughout the auctionprocess, in particular at bid submission and award stages where evaluation timescales were greatly reduced.  &#xa0;9. The RFQ process was very successful and it was swiftly followed up with 3 reverse auctions, covering 15 routes, which they felt would yield further savings.  Each of the auctions did deliver.  Overall, BBC saved 18% on the total cost and were delighted with the results. &#xa0;10. Our experience with the BBC, who were open to look at new tools, was very rewarding and their success and drive helped underpin our philosophy and goals.&#xa0;11. However as an SME we have not found working with the public sector as straightforward as we have with the BBC and perhaps we can give some examples.&#xa0;12. ESPO (Eastern Shires Purchasing Organisation) put out a tender for a Framework agreement (September 2013). The Framework is intended to cover the implementation, licencing and support of a variety of off-the-shelf, web based, hosted, secure modules - E-tendering, E-Evaluation, E-Auctions, E-Contract Management, E-Vendor Management and a Complete E-Procurement Solution.  &#xa0;13. It was then stated that “Any Tenderer who cannot offer one or more of the elements listed above in 3.1 will be removed from this procurement process “&#xa0;14. This has effectively removed us from even starting the process, limiting the liquidity and the options that will be finally presented as part of the Framework.  We understand that this is against current procurement policy and is not in the best interests of the final users of the Framework.&#xa0;15. With Worcester County Council, (WCC), we were required to submit our prices to them on an unfavourable price mechanism, as they would not welcome innovative approaches, nor provided clarity on their call-offs of e-Auctions.  There is no doubting however that we had offered a substantial saving compared to their ‘preferred’ solution for the same service. &#xa0;16. Thankfully other organisations, such as a customer of ours Shropshire County Council (SCC), have been far more open in their decision-making, which has lead to them achieving fantastic results for a fraction of the cost (£500 for 5 very successful e-auctions, as opposed to £2750 per auction that WCC has agreed to via their ‘competitive’ tender process).  We helped SCC achieve this by giving them a monthly price structure, during which they could run as many auctions as they wished.  However this was not welcomed by WCC.&#xa0;17. The provision of e-Auctions is indeed a mature market, which is why we are astounded that WCC has agreed to a fee 27 times in excess of that of their neighbour SCC for exactly the same product and service, simply by adopting a rigid procurement and pricing process, rather than enabling suppliers, like us, to offer the optimal solution. &#xa0;19. Another issue we have faced is the rigor by which local councils have interpreted OJEU rules and following which have developed their own guidelines which, although not incorrect, might not lead to an optimal solution.  One such discussion was with Mole Valley Council.  They had developed their own scoring mechanisms for evaluating weighted tenders which, as we understand, are not unusual.  However from taking a very clear, linear and logical approach to this we find that these scoring approaches might not be the most fair or the most suitable.  The crux of the problem however was that we were told that we would have more chance of being used if we were to re-design our system then look at changes or improvements to their current written process. If we carried this out we would become more like our competition with over-complex platforms making adoption difficult from the supplier and buyer side.&#xa0;20. Our solution is very much innovative.  This is why we can be far more competitive.  A spot of market research and you can see that we are the only e-auction vendor to be open with our fees and to offer contract-free monthly pricing for the service.  It is also this reason we have been awarded several grants by the Technology Strategy Board, as we offer an innovative solution to challenge the current approach by public sector organisations with their use of e-auctions.&#xa0;21. We know we can offer the public sector very real savings, although as you can see from above, we don’t always have the opportunity.&#xa0;18 October 2013