&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Do you think the EU should be providing funding to Member States to tackle youth unemployment? Does EU action respect Member States’ power in the area of social and employment affairs? ]]]&#xa0;As a result of the economic downturn, youth unemployment is at a historically high level across the European Union, albeit there are significant variations between Member States with levels much higher in Mediterranean countries, relative to Northern European. In terms of its own situation, the UK is positioned somewhere in between the two groups of Member States. It should also be noted that prior to the financial / Eurozone crisis, the EU had been attempting to reduce its relatively higher level of youth unemployment compared to its then main competitors of Japan and North America. In its 1994 White Paper ‘European Social Policy’ the European Commission noted that: ‘EU-wide youth unemployment stands at over 20%, as against 13% in the US and 5% in Japan’. Since then the EU has made various attempts to address the problem, albeit with limited success given the flexible governance arrangements often used, and the limited amount of (financial) resources that have been available.  &#xa0;When tracing the subject of youth in EU treaties, we find the first official reference in the 1957 EEC-Treaty. Article 50 of this treaty provides that: Member States shall, within the framework of a joint programme, encourage the exchange of young workers. With the Treaty of Maastricht (1992), this provision was complemented with Article 126 TEC, which deals with youth and education and the participation of young people in democratic life in Europe. Although this seems to cover a broad scope, the competence to deal with the subject is limited to the encouraging of the cooperation between the Member States and, if necessary, by supporting and supplementing their action, while fully respecting the responsibility of the Member States for the content of teaching and the organisation of education systems and their cultural and linguistic diversity. This has remained unchanged during the revisions of Amsterdam (1997; article 149 TEC); Nice (2000; article 149 TEC) and Lisbon (2009; article 165 TFEU). &#xa0;It is in this formal context that EU Youth Policy developed during the 1990s when it gained political momentum at the transnational level. The launching of the European Employment Strategy (EES) in 1997 requested the Member States to reduce youth unemployment. Member States were required to develop employment friendly strategies with the overall aim of ensuring ‘every unemployed young person is [to be offered] a new start before reaching six months of unemployment, in the form of training, retraining, work practice, a job or other employability measure’. Member States were also required to ease the transition from school to work, particularly for young people from poor backgrounds. As such, they were required to improve the quality of their education systems, and where appropriate, develop apprenticeship training. &#xa0;Since the EES, the EU has attempted to resolve the issue of youth unemployment with intergovernmental agreements such as the EU’s Lisbon Strategy (2000), the Laeken Declaration (2001), the European Commission’s 2001 White Paper ‘a new impetus for European Youth’, and the revised Lisbon Strategy of 2005. As part of the latter agreement, the European Council adopted the European Youth Pact focusing on three priority areas: employment integration and social advancement; education, training and mobility; and the reconciliation of work and family life.&#xa0;In 2009 the Council adopted a resolution on a renewed framework for European cooperation in the youth field (2010-2018). The resolution defines one overarching objective, namely ‘to enable all young women and men to make the best of their potential’ to be achieved via two sub-objectives: 1) more and equal opportunities for young people in education and in the labour market; and 2) active citizenship, social inclusion and solidarity of young people. The objectives are underpinned by eight fields of action in which initiatives should be undertaken: education and training; employment and entrepreneurship; health and well being; participation; voluntary activities; social inclusion; youth and the world; and creativity and culture. Such issues surrounding the EU’s young have also been incorporated into Europe 2020, the EU’s latest economic reform strategy. &#xa0;In June 2013, European leaders agreed to ring-fence 8bn euros to combat youth unemployment. The funds will form the basis of a Youth Guarantee that aims to provide a job, training or apprenticeship to young people within four months of them leaving school, full-time education or becoming unemployed. Such funds are designed to complement activities within the Member States and are for those regions worst affected by the problem. This recent initiative builds on EU activity in the field that has developed over the last two decades and I believe that the EU should be acting in this policy field. Given the seriousness of youth unemployment, it seems logical that the EU should offer some financial support to aid Member States. The EU is often criticised for wasting taxpayers’ money in areas such as the Common Agricultural Policy, but financial support in the area of youth unemployment indicates that the EU can, and does, act in policy areas that are highly salient with the electorate and represent serious and immediate problems. An added benefit of attempting to address common problems face by the Member States at EU level, as demonstrated by the research conducted on new modes of governance in the EU over the last 15 years, is that EU activity provides a framework in which different actors from across the Member States, as well as the broader set of EU policy actors, enables the exchange of best practice and peer review of policies. This gives national actors a greater insight into how a policy fields operate in other Member States, with the possibility of adopting and adapting successful policy such ideas to their national context if desired.         &#xa0;Given the limited Treaty basis of the EU in the field, as well as the broader fields of employment and social inclusion, such activity respects the authority and autonomy of Member State sovereignty in the area, is legally non-binding, and therefore has no consequences should a Member State decide not to engage with EU developments. The European Commission therefore cannot refer a Member State to the ECJ for non-compliance with this initiative, and the funds are designed to complement activities and national level. They are not designed replace national initiatives or to provide the Member States with a one-size-fits-all policy approach. It should also be noted that that relative to the problem, the amount of funds available is actually quite small.   &#xa0;

[[[How do you think that the EU can best ‘add value’ to Member States’ efforts to tackle unemployment? ]]]&#xa0;As mentioned above, EU involvement that offers financial support but is also voluntary enables actors from the Member States to engage with those beyond their national borders. This often helps with the spreading of best practice and the search to find solutions to a common set of problems. Member States who are struggling with a particular issue can find out how another Member State has successfully resolved the problem. On a problem as pressing as youth unemployment, the more individuals and organisations that can be involved to come up with new ideas, the more likely governments will find successful solutions quickly. &#xa0;As part of the EU’s 2010 Youth on the Move initiative, the EU’s website on the matter provides a range of tools to help young people work, train and study abroad. A problem with Youth on the Move is that the overall aim is only relevant to a small number of people. The vast majority of the EU’s young want to stay within their own Member State for a whole host of reasons (friends, family, but also poor language skills which would mean that jobs offered in another Member States are likely to be below an individuals skillset). The Youth Guarantee scheme is therefore an attempt to tackle the issue for those individuals who do not wish to migrate to other EU Member States for work.  &#xa0;A problem with the initiative is that the amount of money being spent may be insufficient and furthermore, it may not necessarily be in the right area. Youth unemployment is a complex issue and it has been a problem since before the crisis. For the pre-crisis youth unemployed, issues surrounding poor skills and education and training are highly salient and current EU initiatives may help with this problem. But the recent spike in youth unemployment is a consequence of the recession within the Eurozone and thereby a lack of demand within the economy. For young people who find themselves unemployed post 2008, they are less likely to have poor skills and require retraining. It is therefore questionable how targeted and successful current EU initiatives are. In this respect EU initiatives to boost youth employment could be more targeted to supporting entrepreneurship, helping start-ups with the funding of incubators and centres that specifically focus on young people with new ideas and business initiatives. This would have a much greater long-term impact on the problem than simply focusing on education and training. As the current situation demonstrates, having a highly skilled and educated workforce, as the EU does, is no guarantee of employment.       &#xa0;18 October 2013&#xa0; OJ [1998] C30/1. OJ [1998] C30/1. OJ [2009] C311/1.