&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;Written evidence from the British Ports Association (SRN 045)

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;Summary of the main points&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;We welcome this inquiry. The capacity and efficiency of the strategic road network are central to the success of ports.  The British Ports Association (BPA) represents 48 ports in England, all of which will depend on the adequacy of their links to the UK road network.  All the indications are that road usage for both freight and passengers will increase, and this is a conclusion of the DfT’s Road Transport Forecast 2013.  Currently, two-thirds of all goods are transported to and from ports by road.  In spite of this reliance on road not just for ports but for the economy generally, in comparison with other member states our road network compares poorly and, in the words of the DfT’s “Action for Roads: A Network for the 21st Century”, while the strategic road network compared well with competitors 20 years ago, “it now falls a long way short” (para 1.10).&#xa0;The UK’s road infrastructure is vital as an enabler of economic activity of which the port sector  represents a very significant part.  An Oxford Economics report published in December 2012 showed that in 2011 UK ports contributed £7.9bn to UK GDP and supported 391,800 jobs. They handle 95% of import and export trade by volume and so their connectivity will have an influence far beyond the port gates.  Economic conditions since 2007 and the weakening of demand subsequently have had an impact on port volumes  which rose to a peak of 600m tonnes in 2005.  They are now at a level of just over 500m tonnes.  Nevertheless, tonnage forecasts which are set out as part of the 2012 National Policy Statement for ports indicate a doubling of ro-ro traffic and an increase of 182% in container traffic between now and 2030.  As the “Action for Roads” paper points out, demand will return and port volumes will increase accordingly.  A fit for purpose road network will be required to accommodate that demand.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;We very much welcome the principles and objectives in the “Action for Roads” paper.  It shows a clear commitment to investment in the network, to improve the way in which it is managed and to environmental gains.  We also support the recognition of the need for long term strategies and for greater certainty about spending commitments.  Taken at face value, we do not doubt that if these policies were implemented they would produce improvements, but the track record of all governments in securing consistency for transport spending and planning has been weak.  We note that the recent CBI study of UK infrastructure finds that successive governments have been “dithering over delivery”.  &#xa0;Any discussion about transport inevitably comes back to budgets and it is here that we find the outlook for the network extremely concerning.  For example, a National Audit Office report for 2012 noted that although the DfT’s funding, which provides around 60% of capital funding for transport has remained stable, there has been a 28% fall in grants from the DCLG.  The Audit Commission reported in 2011 that there is “a significant but unquantifiable backlog of maintenance work needed to get local highways to a sustainable level”.  Since then we have had extreme weather events which can only have made the problem worse.  Another important unknown is the effectiveness of the new regional arrangements following the demise of RDAs and the setting up of Local Transport Boards (LTBs).  It is too early to judge the effectiveness of LTBs.  When they were launched a year ago, it was alongside a very ambitious timetable with, for example, a deadline of December 2012 for LTBs to confirm their governance and financial arrangements, effectively allowing three months to do so.  There are no guarantees that funding is available to LTBs which might have failed to meet this strict timetable.  We have had mixed reports about the extent to which LTBs have managed to comply, but a consistent message, in spite of the upbeat summary provided in “Action for Roads” is that there is strong competition for a very limited pot of money.&#xa0;On the basis that, as “Action for Roads” points out, locally managed roads make up 98% of the road network and that almost every journey starts or ends on a local road, the respective roles of LTBs, LEPs and local authorities are absolutely crucial.  We can only support (para 5.3) the commitment to tackling maintenance and other local road network issues, but doubts have to remain as to whether sufficient funds will be available and whether local arrangements are fully in place.  We also support the principles underlining the creation of the Road Investment Strategy (RIS) setting out plans for construction and maintenance for 2021 and beyond.  However, we also note that the government is relying on achieving savings of up to 20% on maintenance and improvement work by allowing suppliers to commit to “innovative working methods”.  20% represents a sizeable figure and there must be uncertainty as to whether such savings can be delivered.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;Although ports in themselves are not a mode, they are of course servicing the maritime logistics chain and there needs to be recognition of the impacts that concentrations of trade will have on the road network.  To a reasonable degree, we believe that this recognition is there and BPA members, for example, are encouraged to produce port masterplans which identify where road improvements are required and the effects that port traffic are likely to have on the network in the future.  The drawing up of marine plans which will identify the main areas of coastal activity, should be helpful to planners in establishing where the main traffic flows are or are likely to be.  Rather than the main network, it is often the final legs of journeys which create delay and congestion. We support higher investment in a range of local repair, maintenance and improvement schemes to improve road connectivity and allow the UK’s collective port assets to be used optimally.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;We are not in a position to comment in detail on the Government’s forecast but we do agree with the general premise that with increases in population and growth of the economy, inevitably there will be growth in road traffic.  But even if there were to be no substantial growth this would not remove the need for substantial investment in the current network, simply to ensure that current bottlenecks are removed and the network is properly maintained.  We note in para 1.22 of the traffic forecast paper the comment that fuel efficiency improvements should have the effect of “significantly decreasing the fuel cost of driving”.  This also contains an assumption about future taxation; if fuel costs were to decline as the forecasts predict, there may be temptation to raise fuel duty in response.  All forecasts have to acknowledge the vast number of unknown factors, but in broad terms we do accept the conclusions of the Government’s forecast in their July 2013 paper.  &#xa0;&#xa0;We have already referred to the overriding need for the right investment, but we also believe that better signage, real time information on traffic flows and other traffic management initiatives can make significant differences.  Paras 1.16 to 1.20 provide a good summary of the technical advances that will become available in the near future.  All these are extremely welcome in terms of environmental protection and safety, but the advantages will be minimized if, as a result of congestion and under-investment by 2040 (as “Action for Roads” points out) almost a quarter of all travel time could be spent “stuck in traffic” (fig 1.5).  &#xa0;&#xa0;We have two issues to raise here.  Firstly, the obvious mechanism and which is now being actively looked at is road tolling.  In the absence of other forms of private investment, this may become the only option if new infrastructure is to be created.  Specific schemes with clear objectives and with the most significant advantages could be considered, but a wholesale change to tolling of the motorway network along the lines operated in France, would not only increase costs significantly, but will have consequences for the rest of the network.  For ports, assessments are already made of what contribution a port can make to a road or rail development linked to a port development.  So the ports industry itself is potentially subject to extra cost.  One of the results of the recent Port Sector Strategy document is an undertaking to review this arrangement.  &#xa0;Secondly, we believe that the Government should make much stronger efforts to ensure that the Trans European Network for transport (TEN-T) could also be used to fund road improvements.  Our understanding of the changes in the new TEN-T legislation is that apart from very specific road schemes strongly linked to environmental improvement, there will be no funding from TEN-T for roads which instead will be allocated to inland waterways and rail projects.  Bearing in mind the sums allocated to HS2 and this recent decision in relation to TEN-T, our perception is that there is a general prejudice amongst policy makers against road as a mode; priority spending goes elsewhere.  We believe this is short sighted and that road as the most used mode for freight and passengers must not be excluded.&#xa0;&#xa0;We support in principle the proposed changes to the Highways Agency and the switch to an independent structure.  We have argued previously for more long term planning certainty and again we would support the concept of a “fixed and stable budget” in parallel with a more commercial approach to the Agency’s functions with a strong emphasis on savings.  We do not share the Government’s conviction that this is the entire answer.  Although long term budget certainty is helpful, the actual level of that budget is the most important factor and, as with the funding statement for the RIS, much is based on prospective savings which may not be as achievable as “Action for Roads” suggests.  However, we support the changes as far as they go and look forward to working with the Agency in its new format.  As to the Government and the private sector ensuring better management of the strategic road network, we would support the production of a formal policy statement on the network along the lines of the National Ports Policy Statement which appeared at the beginning of last year.  This network statement appears to have been sidelined.  Although we would not expect it to produce solutions overnight, we would expect it to set out how the interests of significant generators of traffic such as ports can be taken into account when decisions are made.  As private sector entities, ports themselves are not recipients of public spending and can be marginalized when major decisions are made about road and rail networks.  We also very much look to LEPs and the LTBs to provide an effective forum for private and public sector interests to meet and agree strategies.&#xa0;&#xa0;October 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;