

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[The Historic Houses Association for Scotland (HHAS)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Introduction]]]1.              The Historic Houses Association for Scotland (HHAS) represents around 250 independently owned historic castles, houses and gardens throughout Scotland. Of these, some 40 are regularly open to the public, with another 100 or so available for public access on a less frequent or formal basis: nearly 60 run educational programmes. Collectively, HHAS member properties make a major contribution to employment in Scotland, often in fragile rural economies with few alternative sources of jobs available and to the Scottish economy as a whole. &#xa0;2.              The bulk of Scotland’s built heritage is in independent ownership which means that its future stewardship is secured for the benefit of Scotland and the Scottish people, not least as a key part of the nation’s tourism offer, at little or no public expense. &#xa0;3.              Scotland’s castles and historic houses are a major reason for overseas tourists to choose to visit our country.  The HHAS is delighted to be able to take part in attracting these overseas visitors.  At the same time, however, HHAS is conscious of the equally important part it plays in conserving these assets for the Scottish people both now and for future generations.  They are an integral part of our national life, conserving cultural treasures in their historical setting, telling stories of the families who have looked after them and those who care for them today, creating inspiring places for learning and providing spaces for people to come together and enjoy a shared history. &#xa0;4.              The HHAS vision, which it believes is shared by the Scottish Government and the United Kingdom Government, is for continued stewardship and creative management enabling our heritage to play a vital part in contributing to sustainable economic growth, building a low carbon economy and championing Scotland’s rich heritage. &#xa0;5.              To allow historic houses to make a key contribution to Scotland’s heritage, a sympathetic legislative and policy framework is necessary.  As such, the HHAS would support the broad objectives of this consultation except where they are unclear, impractical or would not help achieve the objective of positive land management, stewardship of heritage and economic growth.&#xa0;6.         Scotland's needs are best served by a diverse range of ownership models, including private ownership, which meet the specific needs of the land and historic buildings to which they apply. A strong and effective private ownership within a sector which encompasses various models of ownership, each operating to their own strengths, is the best form of ownership for Scotland’s needs.&#xa0;

[[[Responses to the questions posed by the Scottish Affairs Committee]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;The current arrangements for property ownership in Scotland are already very diverse.  In addition to private ownership, there are many other models for the ownership of historic houses, including by: Historic Scotland; the National Trust; private companies; local authorities; and trusts, including charitable trust and building preservation trusts.  In general, the particular type of ownership in each case tends to have developed in order to meet the specific needs of the property in question.  A ‘one size fits all’ approach, whether provided by the private sector or community ownership, risks making the management of these properties worse rather than better.&#xa0;The mode of ownership is not the point of principal significance when it comes to the survival of a historic building, but the issue of what makes a property financially sustainable.  Owners would, for example, positively welcome any innovation which could help provide ways to spread the annual cost of repairs to HHAS houses.  Annual expenditure on maintenance at HHA properties is running at more than £14m and the backlog of urgent repairs now totals more than £57m, an increase of 125% on the 2009 figure.&#xa0;Any change in ownership arrangements would constitute a very significant erosion of individuals’ rights, as enshrined in national and international case law and Conventions.    &#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]Those who own and manage historic houses are aware of the importance of a positive relationship with their local communities.  Of the HHA member houses in Scotland, 52 offer free or reduced price local access and 35 more plan to introduce such a scheme, with around 50 local Friends’ membership schemes either in existence or due to come into being.  Historic house owners are already active in their communities, 40% hosting local charitable and community events and 43% raising funds for, or make donations to charities.

[[[  ]]]              Owners of historic houses have actively co-operated with the Core Paths scheme created by the Land Reform (Scotland) Act of 2003, understanding that enabling access supports a sustainable sense of community identity, as well as stimulating tourism.&#xa0;Historic houses not only provide a sense of community, but are also key providers of community facilities, offering attractive and exciting venues for a wide range of events and activities, from theatre and music to sporting and charitable events.&#xa0;However, in order to maintain and improve community access and a sense of identity it will be essential for any changes to the current situation to be clear about the precise nature of community, exactly what any increase in involvement would mean and whether any such role would actually contribute to economic growth.  Independent private ownership has an essential role to play in any mixed economy.  The majority of Scotland’s heritage, including its natural heritage, is independently owned.  It has survived, and is able to contribute positively to Scotland’s future, because of the dedication of successive owners, who have invested their time, resources and commitment to its long term stewardship and maintenance, sometimes when economic viability appeared a very distant goal.  This is a task that could not have been pursued by the public sector, and for the future independent ownership still offers the best long term prospect for sustainable – economic, environmental and social - management for much of this natural heritage.  Any consideration of community involvement should, therefore, have regard to its likely contribution to the essential aim of securing the long term viability of the land in question.  Does it help or hinder independent owners to underpin and attain that very desirable policy objective?&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;If a model is proposed wherein local communities have ‘a greater say in how land is managed and used’ via local authorities, this system must not inhibit owners’ and managers’ capacity to manage property effectively.  In practice, there is already a mechanism for communities to influence how their local areas develop via the process of the local plan.  However, the way in which local authorities currently consult on local plans does not stimulate community involvement or empowerment.  Creating effective community dialogue over local plans within those plans would significantly enhance the community role.&#xa0;Community ownership does not of itself guarantee benefits for a community.  The management of historic properties and their associated land can be complex and often requires experience and professionalism for it to be carried out successfully.  Transferring ownership of land to a community does not necessarily mean that such knowledge and professionalism will be available or applied.&#xa0;When it comes to the Scottish economy, historic houses are key players in their local communities, particularly in rural areas, where other opportunities for employment and business activity are often limited.  HHA properties  in Scotland support paid employment of one form or another of more than 2,200 people and around 4,000 business, through purchases from suppliers, many local.&#xa0;Tourism is a major industry for Scotland and heritage and culture are consistently cited as the principal reason for international visitors, who constitute 35% of all tourist expenditure, coming to Scotland.  As such, the added value provided to the larger Scottish economy by historic houses and their operations is of great significance.  &#xa0;The operation of many of these tourist attractions relies on extremely tightly-run operations, which are anything but a ‘cash cow’ suitable for milking.  In spite of the fact that it is one of Scotland’s most visited attractions, Blair Castle, for example, only aims to break even after paying for necessary repairs and investing in the visitor experience.  These businesses are viable, and positive contributors to the wider economy, but are fragile and vulnerable to excessive regulation.&#xa0;It is this fragility and vulnerability which makes it essential that owners are able to control the settings of historic houses, because many need the income from surrounding land for their properties to be sustainable.  Historic houses need sources of income to guarantee their conservation and in many cases this comes from their associated land.  Keeping the productive assets together with the 'consuming assets', that is the house itself, is essential. Once the link is broken then the future of historic houses depends on money coming in from external sources, which is a much less certain foundation for long term preservation. 

[[[&#xa0;]]]Any programme of land reform should be undertaken only with the greatest caution.  The HHAS supports a diverse pattern of ownership of land and built property, but such diversity should not become an object in itself, because it cannot address the critical issue of ensuring the viability of historic houses in the long term, for the benefit of the Scottish nation and its people.  If it cannot be demonstrated that a change in the mode of ownership will make historic buildings more rather than less financially viable, that it will make them more rather than less efficiently run as a key part of the Scottish economy, particularly in rural areas, and that it will not infringe the established right of owners to manage their own properties, then such change cannot be justified and should not be introduced.  &#xa0;&#xa0;If land were to be taken from one ownership to another, it would need to be demonstrable beyond any doubt that the conservation of historic houses and positive land management of integrated rural estates would be made more viable – not less – and that the changes did not increase dependence on public funding.  It would also be necessary to provide compensation, paid from the public purse.  Property law has established the requirement for compensation under such circumstances and it is required under the European Convention on Human Rights to be fair and timely.&#xa0;Land Reform combined with a Community Right to Buy might result in the ‘cherry-picking’ of areas, effectively stripping houses of their surrounding land and thereby rendering them – and the economic and community value they provide - nonviable.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]The system of financial payments to land managers is operated under the rules of the Common Agricultural Policy, applicable throughout the EU, with a degree of flexibility for member states and within that, for parts of member states.  However, it is a principle across the EU that CAP payments to the occupiers of agricultural land, rather than to the owners as such.  Where land is tenanted or otherwise managed by someone other than the owner, it will be that person, not the owner, who receives the payment.  Furthermore, payments are conditional upon certain activities being carried out and upon the compliance by the occupier with the rules and regulations of the EU and member state, for example in relation to pollution control.  Payments may be made in respect of the carrying on of a farming business, or payments may be made under the agri-environment schemes for specific and positive land management actions, to enhance the landscape and or wildlife habitats, or to retain historic features.&#xa0;The extent to which the provision of such payments raises the capital value of agricultural land is a moot point.  It will depend on expectations for the duration of such payments in future and the prospect of changes to the terms and conditions applying to their provision.  The effect will be different for tenanted from land with vacant possession, the nature of the land and the profitability of farming, even with the provision of CAP payments.  To the extent that capital values are raised  - and there is an expectation that this will remain the case – there will  also be effects on the provision of loan finance to purchase such land, although the longer term the loan, the smaller the uplift in the capital value will be taken into account in the terms of the loan.  In other words, a longer term loan could be expected to be harder to get and a smaller loan would probably be offered, because the long term future of CAP payments is so uncertain.&#xa0;The tax system operates in the same way in Scotland as in the UK as a whole.  Relief from Inheritance Tax (IHT) for agricultural land (APR) is provided in broadly the same way as Business Property Relief is provided for other businesses – in each case to enable those who have managed and built up a business, agricultural or otherwise, to pass it on to a successor without a significant portion being taken out of the business through IHT.  Such reliefs from inheritance taxes for businesses are common in the developed world.&#xa0;The provision of APR may have an effect on the value of land, as BPR may have a similar effect on the value of other businesses.  At the same time, by supporting the long term viability of agricultural businesses, it would tend to make loan financing for purchase easier than it might otherwise be.   Many new entrants to farming would consider a renting arrangement before purchasing land, whether or not APR were in place, and the availability of land for rent is probably as important a factor in encouraging new entrants as the price of land itself.    &#xa0;The stake which communities already have in Scotland’s heritage in independent ownership is considerable in terms of the economy, education, sustainability and community identity.  This is a good time to articulate the involvement that communities have and to identify the positive roles they could play.                If a model is proposed wherein local communities have ‘a greater say in how land is managed and used’ via local authorities, this system must not inhibit owners’ and managers’ capacity to manage property effectively.  In practice, there is already a mechanism for communities to influence how their local areas develop via the process of the local plan.  However, the way in which local authorities currently consult on local plans does not stimulate community involvement or empowerment.  Creating effective community dialogue over local plans within those plans would significantly enhance the community role.&#xa0;Community ownership does not of itself guarantee benefits for a community.  The management of historic properties and their associated land is complex and requires experience and professionalism for it to be carried out successfully.  Transferring ownership of land to a community does not mean that such knowledge and professionalism will be available or applied.&#xa0;If communities, however they are defined, are to have a stake in land and other assets, it must be clear what the purpose of their involvement would be, how it would be achieved and how such involvement would lead to better management of one of Scotland’s key assets.&#xa0;The suggestion that the Land Reform (Scotland) Act of 2003 might be amended, ‘to make it easier for communities to obtain ownership of land and/or other assets,’ raises serious issues.  The rule of law has historically protected the ownership of private property and owners’ rights to sell to whomever they wish.  A provision to enable communities of any type to acquire property against the wishes of the owner would amount to a right of confiscation applied selectively against a particular group, namely owners of land or buildings, and as such would be contrary to widely accepted principles of property ownership, as well as contrary to human rights established in Scots law by international treaty and statute.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;The HHA Scotland does not support Land Value Taxes, either as a replacement for or as an addition to Council Tax or Business Rates, for a number of  reasons:&#xa0;&#xa0;October 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; HHA Survey of Members (2013) HHA survey of Members (2013) HHA Survey of Members (2009) HHA Survey of Members (2013) Land Reform Review Group: Call for Evidence (2012) HHA Survey of Members (2013) Visit Scotland Survey (2006) Land Reform Review Group: Call for Evidence (2012) Land Reform Review Group: Call for Evidence (2012)