

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;Dr Tim Brown and his colleagues have been involved in consultancy and research projects on improving customer services for over 15 years. Their focus has been on housing, planning and regeneration including:&#xa0;&#xa0;Dr Brown previously submitted written material and gave oral evidence to the Public Administration Select Committee Inquiry into choice, voice and public services in 2004/05.&#xa0;&#xa0;The long term reform of public services focuses on choice, empowerment and personalisation for individuals and communities. The benefits centre on capacity building as well as outcomes. However, it is a time-consuming and resource intensive process to develop local innovative approaches to service delivery. There is, thus, a danger that radical models will remain at the margins rather than becoming part of the mainstream. One of the ways of addressing this challenge is to learn the lessons from other countries.  &#xa0;&#xa0;To what extent is the Government’s public service reform programmesucceeding in:a. Empowering citizens?b. Improving public services?c. Ensuring that public services are accountable to the peoplewho use them, and to elected officials?&#xa0;The current Government’s programme is a continuation of the work of previous administrations on putting the customer first in the design and delivery of public services. It represents a positive shift from the paternalistic ‘professionals know best’ approach. The principles of empowerment, choice and personalisation are the three key elements of a long term consensus that is also apparent in many other Western European countries. For the purpose of clarity, ‘empowerment’ relates to the provision of information so that the user has the knowledge of what is on offer, by whom and how. ‘Choice’ centres on the opportunities for users to choose the content and level of service, the provider and form of access. ‘Personalisation’  refers to the ability of the user to actively make informed decisions. &#xa0;As public service reform is a long term project, it is difficult to evaluate the impact of the current government’s policies. Major changes take a long time to design and implement. For example, the previous administration’s target set in 2002 that 100% of councils and their partners should be using choice-based lettings in social housing by the end of 2010 was achieved, as less than 5% failed to meet this requirement. In relation to community land trusts, the previous Government’s Green Paper on Housing in 2007 emphasised their role. This has been further strengthened by this Government in its housing strategy in November 2011. In research that we undertook in 2012, we concluded that there was considerable interest with over 150 active organisations. But outcomes in terms of new affordable homes and community-owned and managed facilities were limited. For example, less than 100 homes had so far been completed (see below). This was mainly because of the time required by communities to build up their skills and to go through the development process, which can be between 3-5 years.       &#xa0;&#xa0;What evidence is there that citizen-centred approaches to publicservice design, delivery and choice of provider can deliver betteroutcomes—ensuring not only better value for money, but alsogreater social, economic and environmental value?&#xa0;&#xa0;In relation to community land trusts (CLTs) and similar initiatives, progress on the development of specific projects since the Quirk Review on community asset disposals in 2007 has been slow. In a study of CLTs in 2012, we found that although there were over 150 active organisations, less than 100 affordable homes had been completed. Nevertheless a re-occurring theme from this and earlier research highlighted the benefits to communities and individuals in building up capacity, confidence, skills and trust. For example, the development of a small CLT in Cumbria contributed to the ability of the local community to take over the ownership and management of the village pub, thus saving it from closure.  &#xa0;We would conclude that while outcomes are vital, one should not ignore the benefits of the process for communities and individuals. &#xa0;Question Three &#xa0;What are the risks and opportunities of opening up public services toalternative forms of ownership, provision and accountability?a. How do we ensure open access to public services underalternative forms of ownership, provision and control?&#xa0;In relation to community- based initiatives, our research over the last decade highlights the following three points on the process of community empowerment and service delivery:&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;From a government perspective, delivery can appear slow because of the time to build up community capacity and then design and implement schemes. There is no fast-track solution to this without disempowering communities by imposing external solutions to speed up delivery. A balance, therefore, has to be achieved between speed and community empowerment. &#xa0;Nevertheless, as has already been pointed out, the opportunities outweigh the risks in terms of building up the capacity of individuals and communities as well as outcomes. &#xa0;Question Four &#xa0;What are the challenges and opportunities in moving power awayfrom Whitehall and into the hands of citizens?&#xa0;The fundamental issue is one of achieving a balance between local autonomy for councils and citizens and ensuring a satisfactory standard of services. We need an open date on the extent to which we are prepared to have a ‘post code lottery’ with different levels and types of services in each area. Other Western European countries have well-established and different principles on central-local government relations. In the Netherlands, legislation tends to be facilitating rather than directive. For instance, there is a requirement to have a social housing allocations and lettings policy, but it is not prescriptive or detailed. The Netherlands is the home of choice-based lettings. It was developed by the City of Delft as an advertising model in 1990. It is now widely used, but not every municipality has adopted this method. In addition, the Netherlands system of financing local government relies on single pot funding rather than many different streams of ring-fenced financial support. Finally and most importantly, the local government culture is one of facilitating the provision of services through strategic commissioning rather than direct provision. There is, thus, a wide range of public, private and third sector providers. &#xa0;This is not to suggest that one should transfer the Dutch model to England, as the economic, political and social systems are different. However, instead, it can be used as a starting point for an informed debate about the relationships between citizens, councils and government.    &#xa0;Question Five &#xa0;How successful have the Government’s reforms been in opening uppublic services to grassroots community groups, rather than to largeprivate or third sector organisations?a. How can public service contracts be designed to enable serviceusers to choose from a wider range of providers, includingcommunity-based providers, to achieve self-defined outcomes?b. What impact has the Community Right to Bid, Community Rightto Challenge, and Community Right to Build had on localcommunities?&#xa0;In relation to (a), the social value legislation that came into force in February 2013 requires public authorities to take into account the social and environmental issues in awarding contracts through the commissioning process. This might include, for instance, training and jobs for local people offered by a local social enterprise. However, we should be under no illusion that in a competitive market with private companies willing to make extremely low bids and public agencies faced with severe funding cuts, the prospects are not good. Indeed, despite broad Government support for mutuals, there is frequent coverage in the online ‘social enterprise UK’ of closures of companies. Nevertheless, examples such as Bristol and Plymouth that have become the first social enterprise cities is an encouraging way forward in terms of setting a strategic agenda. &#xa0;In relation to (b), as has already been pointed out, the localism initiatives on community rights are starting to have an impact on neighbourhood initiatives. But it will be a number of years before there are tangible outcomes. &#xa0;More generally, there is much to commend about the government’s community rights approach including neighbourhood planning. However, from our research on community land trusts, there is a danger that the neighbourhoods in most need of such initiatives will be excluded. This is because of the lack of support from central and local government for socially excluded areas. For example, while there has been interest in urban community land trusts, none so far have progressed to the development stage. Yet it is often inner city neighbourhoods and peripheral social housing estates where there is a need for and the potential of grass-roots action. The Government has put in place funding for organisations to provide support, but it is relatively insignificant and not targeted at areas that most require it.    &#xa0;Question Six &#xa0;How well do different tiers of government or different parts of singlepublic sector organisation, at central, local authority or districtcouncils level, work together to deliver public services?a. What impact does the Whitehall federal department structurehave on contracting for public services that fall acrossdepartmental or organisational boundaries?b. How does the Government ensure that public services developthe right kind of leadership as they become more open, moresubject to scrutiny and more customer-focused?&#xa0;The relationship between central and local governments has been covered in the response to question four. From a community and a user perspective, we would like to highlight that there is often bewilderment over the number and type of public agencies and public private partnerships involved in the design and delivery of services. We undertook a project in 2009 /10 in collaboration with Hull City Council on local delivery vehicles. We found that in East Hull, there were over 20 partnerships and local delivery vehicles. Residents welcomed the investment especially through the Goodwin Trust (one of the largest social enterprises in the country), but were perplexed over ‘who was doing what’ and ‘whether it was co-ordinated’. One of our recommendations was that the local authority should consider a broader facilitating and co-ordination role. This contributed to some rationalisation over the plethora of delivery organisations. &#xa0;Question Seven &#xa0;What examples are there of innovative ways to deliver better publicservices in local government, from other countries or from otherpublic service providers?&#xa0;There is value in exploring the design and delivery of public services in other countries. But it is essential to avoid simplistic policy transfer as the ‘grass is often not greener’ elsewhere! Instead we argue for lesson learning from other countries so as to stimulate an informed debate on innovation. &#xa0;Four illustrations relevant to the material in this submission are: &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;We have already made reference to other Dutch examples in our response to question four. &#xa0;There are two interrelated and important points arising from these illustrations. Firstly, governments can foster innovation through facilitating legislation. Secondly, grass-roots organisations can flourish and grow but they need local and national support.  &#xa0;Question Eight &#xa0;How realistic is it that “choice” can be exercised in public serviceprovision or should we be looking instead at greater control by usersso they can ensure that public services become more responsive tochanging needs?a. How do we make sure that all citizens are able to influencepublic services?&#xa0;The example of choice-based lettings illustrates the importance of choice. But it cannot be separated from empowerment and personalisation. Customers are only empowered if they are provided with advice and information on the realistic choices that are available. There are too many cases where, for example, housing advice services are not integrated with lettings. Similarly, we have come across examples where vulnerable households have been set up to fail, as support has not been available to help them make informed decisions. This is especially as personalisation requires that the customers can make informed decisions on their individual unique requirements. The choice agenda has to engage with that of equality and diversity. &#xa0;Furthermore, the prospects for choice, empowerment and personalisation are uncertain in the current public sector financial climate – they are at a tipping point. There could, firstly, be a service retrenchment leading to reduced eligibility for services. In this case, choice would be extremely limited in terms of scope and availability. Secondly, there might be a return to a traditional paternalistic model. Thirdly, and more optimistically, fiscal austerity might lead to a radical rethink that promotes mutualism. There are examples of the latter taking place . Rochdale Boroughwide Housing, for instance, has taken over the ownership and management of over 13,000 council homes. It is a mutual organisation wholly owned by tenants and employees. &#xa0;Question Nine &#xa0;What safeguards should be in place to deal with service providerswho fail to deliver services, or who deliver services of an insufficientquality?&#xa0;Reactive responses to service failure are an essential requirement. The starting point has to be an effective in-house system. Nevertheless, there has to be external regulation. &#xa0;Our work in Hull highlighted that residents felt that it was the role of the local authority to call local delivery vehicles and public private partnerships to account. In fact, this type of approach is common in the Netherlands. Nevertheless, it is not appropriate where the council runs local services.  &#xa0;Question Ten &#xa0;How do we ensure that best practice is shared so it can be replicatedin the context of greater diversity of provision?a. Are there any types of public services that you think should notbe opened up to new models of design, delivery or provision?&#xa0;The basic issue is that many case studies are labelled as best practice without any transparent evidence. Websites and reports frequently cite good practice, but it is far from clear how and why they have been selected. In our opinion, they have to be robustly and independently evaluated on process and outcomes before being accredited as best practice. There are lessons to be learnt from the Dutch example of the work of the social housing experiment unit (SEV) – see above. &#xa0;&#xa0;How well has the system of Payment by Results worked in thedelivery of public services and how do we make it work better?&#xa0;We are unable to make a response to this question.  &#xa0;Question Twelve &#xa0;What progress has been made in setting up mutuals as an effectiveway of delivering public services?&#xa0;We have used above the example of Rochdale Boroughwide Housing. It illustrates similar issues to the slow growth of community land trusts and community rights. Firstly, it takes time and resources to develop and deliver innovative approaches to public services. Secondly, active community and employee involvement is not straightforward. There is often initial scepticism and cynicism over such initiatives. These cannot be quickly overcome. Thirdly, while the legislative and regulatory environments are not necessarily obstacles, they nonetheless have to be addressed. Progress, therefore, can appear to be slow and protracted. But this is the inevitable part of developing radical innovative solutions. &#xa0;October 20131&#xa0; There is a fuller discussion of these definitions in Brown, T. and Yates, N. (2011) Choice, Empowerment and Personalisation: Taking Forward Public Services in a Recession?. In Richardson, J. (Ed) (2011) From Recession to Renewal, Bristol, Policy Press pp 157-178. Brown, T. and Lishman, R. (2010) Co-ordinating Regeneration: Improving Effectiveness in Local Delivery, Newcastle, Northern Way, Regeneration Momentum Research Paper 3.   