

[[[Further ]]]

[[[written evidence from Simon Creighton (LAI 0087)]]]&#xa0;1. During the oral evidence session, the Committee asked if we could provide written evidence about the responses made by the prison authorities to inquiries made by Members of Parliament for their constituents (and also the possible impact of the proposed legal aid reforms on the work load of Members of Parliament). Unfortunately, we are not aware of any statistics specifically relating to prisoners that may assist the Committee and can only provide anecdotal feedback. However, we are aware of some general research concerning the impact of legal aid cuts on MPs and their caseloads.2. The right of prisoners to send confidential correspondence to MPs is not protected by the Prison Rules 1999. The Rules only protect confidential correspondence with legal advisers and the courts. It is, however, prison service policy that correspondence between prisoners and their MPs in relation to constituency business should be treated as confidential in the same way as legally privileged communications. This does not have any statutory footing.“Correspondence between prisoners and their MP, AM and MEP must be treated as privileged but only where they are acting in a constituency capacity (not in a social capacity). This privilege does not extend to Members of the House of Lords, who have no constituency responsibilities, or to Local Councillors. All outgoing correspondence must be appropriately addressed i.e. to the particular Member at (i) the House of Commons, (ii) the National Assembly for Wales and (iii) the European Parliament and should also bear the prisoner’s home or current (prison) address. All incoming correspondence should be written on and enclosed in officially recognised stationery and displaying an official identifying mark of the appropriate authority. However, if an MP, AM or MEP is writing to a prisoner in a purely social capacity, i.e. that individual is a personal friend or colleague, then the letter is not covered by this privilege and official stationery should not be used.”3. The Prison Service Instruction on the complaints process (PSI 2012/02) contains advice on the right of prisoners to contact MPs in relation to the presentation of petitions but not in any other context:“Every prisoner is entitled to petition Parliament. As a general rule, petitions to Parliament are presented in the House of Commons; a prisoner who is not sure which House to petition should be advised to petition the House of Common through a Member of Parliament. The MP need not necessarily be the constituency MP of the prisoner. Petitions may also be presented to the House of Lords via a member of that House.” (emphasis in original)4. The terms of reference for the Parliamentary and Health Ombudsman, the body that may review the work of the Prisons and Probations Ombudsman and deal with complaints arising from the healthcare treatment of prisoners, requires a referral from the constituency MP.5. Prior to the introduction of the complaints system in the early 1990s (following the Woolf Report), it was extremely common for prisoners to contact their MPs for assistance. Anecdotally, our experience is that this is now far less common. We would, however, expect this to again become a routine method of complaint for prisoners and their families if access to legal advice is removed.6. In cases where MPs do raise issues for their constituents in custody, the general practice is for a reply to be sent explaining the policy background and assuring the MP that the prisoner has been treated fairly and in accordance with that policy. We are not aware of any cases where a substantive decision has been altered as a result of a MPs intervention. The Howard League’s focus on the wider policy issues as well as individual case work means that matters affecting individuals are often brought to the attention of MPs. While this is incredibly important in terms of advocating for systemic change, it has not proved an effective means of achieve redress or justice for individuals on its own. In fact, the involvement of MPs very often triggers a referral to a solicitor to provide legal advice and assistance.7. We are able to provide an example for the Committee. This concerned a question that arose over the legality of the prison service’s policy barring all resettlement leaves for prisoners who had default terms for non payment of confiscation orders still to be served. The following is an extract from the court documents lodged by one prisoner who had contacted her MP for assistance:“The claimant also sought the assistance of her Member of Parliament, Sadiq Khan, who wrote on her behalf to the Ministry of Justice. On 17 September 2007 Maria Eagle MP, Parliamentary Under Secretary of State responded to Mr Khan’s letter on behalf of the defendant. On the issue of the application of PSO 6300, she stated:—‘Ms H is also concerned about her ability to maintain her family ties. Once a period in default for non-payment of a confiscation order is enforced, the prisoner is immediately ineligible for [ROTL] on the original criminal sentence; ROTL can only take place on the default term to serve providing the period is [sic] default is of a reasonable length. Prison Service Order 6300 Release on Temporary Licence (ROTL) was introduced in January 2006 following a lengthy consultation period. One of the key principles of ROTL is to maintain public confidence in the administration of justice. Although Ms H’s case appears to be an extreme example, with such a small period to serve, there are many cases where the confiscation sum itself involves an extremely large amount of money and a lengthy term in default for non payment. The current policy is designed to encourage prisoners to pay the proceeds of their crime.’She went on to explain that a post-implementation review of the PSO had begun which had been delayed but would be completed at the earliest opportunity. Finally she expressed sympathy for the claimant.On 25 February 2008 Maria Eagle responded to a further letter from Mr Khan explaining that the review had not been recommenced as planned due to other pressing priorities. She said that the Ministry would ensure that the review balances the needs of prisoners and their families as well as public confidence in the administration of justice.”8. In the event no review took place and a subsequent application for judicial review established that the policy was unlawful as it had placed a fetter on the discretion of the prison Governor. Had the prisoner not taken legal proceedings, the situation would not have changed at all and the MP would simply have been assured that the system was operating properly.25 October 2013&#xa0; See research by the Young Legal Aid Lawyers, available at http://www.younglegalaidlawyers.org/Nowhereelse-to-turn-part2 Prison Rules 1999, r 37 Prison Service Instruction 49/2011, paragraph 14.7 Annex A http://www.ombudsman.org.uk/make-a-complaint/how-to-complain : “Please fill out a complaint form and pass it to an MP to refer your complaint to us. Having your complaint sent to us by an MP is a legal requirement.”&#xa0; Although we appreciate that this is not surprising as we would not be contacted in such cases. Adesola Adelana v The Governor of HMP Downview, Secretary of State for Justice [2008] EWHC 2612 (Admin)