&#xa0;

[[[Rathbone—Written Evidence]]]House of Lords Inquiry into EU Youth Unemployment&#xa0;Rathbone believes the new EU action to tackle youth unemployment does respect individual Member States powers in the areas of social and employment affairs. Individual states are able to provide any additional necessary interventions, providing measures and restrictions to EU initiatives. They can ensure that these are consistent with and can be accommodated within national and regional economic and social conditions, for example, taking account of the difference between rural and urban economies and social conditions.We further believe the problem of youth unemployment across the EU is so great today that there is the potential for serious social and economic consequences of not addressing the situation. The economic productivity of Member States is based on having a skilled and flexible workforce. Long term youth unemployment reduces competitive advantage and increases welfare dependency with associated poor health impacts.  . Many Member States are struggling with wider economic conditions and without EU support would not be able to tackle the issue of youth unemployment without cross border transnational interventions.We would also like to make the point that the 6 Billion Euros that has been committed to tackle youth unemployment via the YEI is a very low amount of funding in comparison to the problem, representing around 850 Euros per individual young unemployed person.Rathbone recommend that it is the Member State which is asked to provide any match funding required for programmes rather than individual organisations and service delivery is then publically procured.  Moreover, that a differentiated approach is adopted in the allocation of funding to better reflect Member States particular economic and social conditions. It is further recommended that a differentiated approach is applied more vigorously within countries receiving funding. Furthermore, the restrictions of YEI funds to those Member States with youth unemployment above 25% significantly disadvantages those nations who have pockets of youth unemployment above 25% for example Ireland, UK, Netherlands but where  the national percentage is below the 25% threshold making it ineligible for YEI funding. We agree and strongly support the introduction of EU Youth Action Teams to instruct and support Member States to reprofile their European Structural Funds towards reducing youth unemployment. There is an obvious problem when collectively EU Member States are currently spending more on subsidies for cows than on initiatives to reduce youth unemployment.  The priority now needs to be the implementation of the YEI programme and wider ESF initiatives as the needs of young people who are unemployed, some for many years now are becoming more pressing. In summary, to ensure success there needs to be a greater effort to ensure all the interventions are joined up as a comprehensive action plan. Overarching coordination is vital if we are to avoid a piecemeal approach. Solving youth unemployment cannot be achieved with isolated interventions; these need to include addressing wider policy issues such as education, social welfare and mobility for young people.30 October 2013&#xa0; Work Foundation Research Paper June 2012 ‘Short Term Crisis – Long Term Problem”