

[[[Written evidence submitted by Lesley ]]]

[[[Riddoch]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;Despite earlier Land Reform legislation and unilateral action by communities like Eigg (of which I was a trustee for eight years), Scotland still has one of the most concentrated patterns of landownership in the developed world. I’m currently researching a PhD comparing Norway and Scotland – it would be hard to find a more striking contrast between two neighbouring nations. &#xa0;One reason Norway had one of the widest franchises in Northern Europe was the Constitution of 1814, which extended the vote to all male landowners over the age of 25 with the result that 45 per cent of men became eligible to vote overnight. This compared with 0.173 per cent of Scots enfranchised by the British Reform Bill of 1832. Enfranchising landowners gave the vote to almost half of Norwegian men but fewer than half&#xa0;of one per cent of Scotsmen in the early 19th century – and the result wouldn’t be very different in either country today. The breadth of the Norwegian electorate meant that a cross-section of society had ‘skin in the game’ and had to be politically accommodated. At first educated officials in Oslo looked down on peasants as ‘the estate of the most foolish’, but soon the liberal intelligentsia joined forces with them to make Government more responsive to Parliament, and force through new, elected, representative municipal councils in 1837 to permanently restrict the local power of central ‘Danophile’ elites and state officials. This paved the way for the subsequent development of proportional representation, a political culture of compromise and the embrace of equality as the nation’s guiding social and economic policy objective. In 1814, the average Norwegian man had the vote and owned his farm. The average Scotsman had neither. That continues to have a massive effect on Scottish democracy.&#xa0;&#xa0;Every system becomes self-justifying and self-generating. So landowners believe that without their management, large areas of Scotland would lie depopulated and without investment. It’s very hard to see that much landowner largesse relies on a taxation system which doesn't charge business rates on most sporting estates, on Trusts which allow families to avoid other taxes and death duties and on primogeniture (which allows the eldest son to inherit land without division with siblings in Scotland.) &#xa0;&#xa0;The best answer to this is an ambitious experiment begun 25 years ago by two Perthshire ecologists Ron Greer and Derek Pretswell. The Scottish Government website tells us “invasive non-native species are the second biggest threat, after habitat destruction, to native species and habitats worldwide.” Perhaps that’s wrong. The biggest threat to Scotland’s wonderfully diverse habitat is the legion of land owners (public and private) who believe Scotland is “naturally” a barren wilderness where nothing grows except heather moorland (for grouse shooting) and rows of tightly packed, diversity-defeating conifers (for sale). Our land is capable of much, much more. Broad-leaved trees can grow anywhere sheep and deer are largely excluded. &#xa0;You can see natural regrowth on sheep-free hills, hard-to-reach verges and central reservations where deer fear to tread. But soil also needs a revival. When that’s done, a lush, diverse, flower, herb and insect-rich woodland habitat can be re-created for next to nothing. The proof lies in six areas of woodland off the A9 on the barren wasteland of Dalnaspidal by Loch Garry. &#xa0;Twenty years ago local ecologists Ron Greer and Derek Pretswell used a “succession planting” technique – mixing lupins and broom with broad-leaved saplings to improve the soil, provide shelter and raise micro-temperatures so the trees would finally flourish. Sheep and deer were fenced out. After two years, lupins and broom seemed to take over. Today those first protective species have mostly gone, replaced by wild raspberries, insects, herbs and flowers beneath tree species which provide daylight beneath canopies and leaf litter for bigger, healthier fish in the neighbouring loch – potentially adding to local food supplies. Exotic grey, red and green Alders have added nitrogen to the soil. &#xa0;Non-shade creating Larch have allowed blueberries and heather to grow and make excellent wood for fuel. Ditto Norwegian Maple which also provides a source of glorious colour in the autumn. They are all non-native trees and utterly effective in transforming this part of the man and sheep-made desert that flanks the highest parts of the A9. &#xa0;Why do Scots not demand leaf-litter-producing trees round lochs to double the size of fish? Is it because none but paying customers and friends of the landowner currently sees or tastes the high-protein products of our lochs and rivers? Ron Greer estimates the current mixed woodlands of Perthshire’s enormous Atholl Estate could keep the towns of Pitlochry, Blair Atholl, Dunkeld and Rannoch supplied with wood for heat in perpetuity. With oil and gas prices about to hit the roof this winter why isn’t this home-grown solution even being discussed? Because our forests are off limits. &#xa0;We could choose to transform highland deserts into mixed forests, containing new, self sufficient villages, fish-producing lochs and tourists keen to see the most spectacular Autumn Colours in Northern Europe. &#xa0;&#xa0;As recommended by the report authors. &#xa0;&#xa0;There has been comment on the agricultural, conservation and access grants available to landowners. I’d like to concentrate on the vast new subsidies now being earned by landowners through wind farms – bolstering perhaps the most concentrated system of landownership in Europe, denying communities income and the right to a say over developments and stoking up widespread resentment to renewable energy, especially wind, as nearby resource results in next to no reduction in soaring energy bills for rural consumers. Scotland is reputedly the Saudi Arabia of renewable energy. That’s assumed to be a reference to Scotland’s vast renewable resources – in wind, hydro, biomass and marine. Perhaps though, the most important parallel is rather different. Energy developments in both countries benefit very few people directly because very few own the land.&#xa0;The Kirk’s recent submission to the Land Reform Review Group (LRRG) made just this point. &#xa0;“The ownership of land in Scotland remains deeply inequitable and the new landed income from wind power entrenches that inequality. If landowners are gaining financial rewards from renewables while a growing number of households are living in fuel poverty, then the strong case for re-examining land reform to ensure the financial benefits of renewables are shared more equitably is strengthened further.”&#xa0;The Tory MEP Struan Stevenson recently calculated that the Duke of Roxburghe could net £1.5 million a year, the Earl of Moray, £2 million and the Earl of Glasgow more than £300,000 from wind farms on their land. &#xa0;Mr Stevenson and the Scottish Tories think the solution is a one year moratorium on new wind farms and a halving of wind subsidies. And yet the Conservative environment spokesman, Jamie McGrigor and Tory MSPs Alex Fergusson and John Scott are all set to receive big bungs from wind turbine developers. Double standards apart though, why is this a problem? &#xa0;First, unlike Saudi Arabia, Scotland is a democracy where one would expect wealth, including the wealth that arises from natural assets, to be shared. &#xa0;Second, fuel poverty causes hyperthermia and chronic ill health, so a cash share in the country’s wind earnings would be a quick way to cut bills and save lives.&#xa0;Thirdly, high energy costs deter industry by turning energy-rich Scotland into an energy-expensive location for new business.&#xa0;Finally, it could be otherwise as the intriguing tale of the “wind crofter” demonstrated this weekend (Scotland on Sunday 26.5.13) Under the Energise Scotland scheme smallholders, crofters and communities host small turbines and get free electricity while developers pay for the kit and sell excess energy to the grid. There may be better schemes around, but “wind crofting” demonstrates the empowering potential of wind income split more evenly. A small turbine can reduce individual energy bills to zero and still make a profit for investors, as long as that individual owns land.&#xa0;And there of course is the rub.&#xa0;Scotland may be a northern energy emirate, but ordinary Scots pay the highest electricity bills in Europe because 60% of “our” private land is owned by just a thousand people – and the disappointing interim report by the Land Reform Review Group suggests this shameful picture is not about to change.&#xa0;Now admittedly, land ownership and the possibility of free or discounted electricity have not featured strongly in the wind farm debate so far. &#xa0;Battle lines have been drawn instead over appearance, intermittency and cost – and though a vocal minority won a ban on new wind farms in “scenic areas”, they’ve failed to dent the consistent majority for wind energy in regular opinion polls. &#xa0;Dig deeper in the data however and its clear wind energy is more popular in cities than country areas. Is that because of visual interference or financial unfairness?  We’ll probably never know. Somehow the public hoped and presumed the renewable energy bonanza would be different. &#xa0;The industry does offer community benefit – a sum per megawatt of wind generated locally. But some communities have not spent their wind cash and few have performed land buyouts to become joint wind developers – even though Duke-sized hand-outs await. What are communities waiting for?&#xa0;Well clarity, fairness, political backing and land reform.Communities recognise what Ministers and the LRRG evidently cannot. The unavailability of land is a chronic problem and the time for sticking plaster solutions is over. Enthusiastic Scots are weary of shouldering terrifying legal burdens, cajoling reluctant banks, bending rules and using ad hoc arrangements to operate in markets designed for big commercial players.&#xa0;&#xa0;Since 2003 17 land buyouts have taken place and a 2011 report shows those communities are measurably more resilient than they were as private fiefdoms. In Stòras Uibhist on South Uist, turnover is ten times higher than it was in 2006, when Scotland’s largest community buyout took place. In general, school rolls have almost doubled, population has increased, energy supply systems have improved, local land ownership has prompted young people to build homes and start families and old people don’t face the unpalatable choice of living locally without heat or in a distant old folk’s home without company. Historian Professor Jim Hunter has calculated that all the community buyouts and associated improvement grants have probably cost the public purse £100 million – roughly equivalent to eight weeks of agricultural subsidy. Do many other public realm projects show anything like such a healthy return on investment – in human or monetary terms? And yet, there’s still scepticism – about buyouts, community control and the long term capacity of people managing their own land. &#xa0;There are various reasons for that. The inspiring human stories of triumph over adversity on Eigg (for example) were all too quickly subsumed into a complex legal, political and historical case for land reform – absolutely necessary, but alienating for non-specialists. Broadcasters like the BBC were wary about ‘taking sides’ and urban Scots were unable to see parallels between dramatic land battles ‘in the sticks’ and city problems of land scarcity and high prices on their own doorsteps. Few small mainland communities were well-enough organised to take advantage of the new buyout legislation. And relatively few estates came onto the market anyway, giving locals little chance to make pre-emptive bids.&#xa0;All in all, the community buyouts of the nineties and noughties started a slow burn on neighbouring Hebridean islands, but failed to set the mainland heather alight. Now – a decade after Scotland’s historic land reform legislation – fewer than one in ten communities that registered a desire to buy land actually managed to do it, and only 142 communities out of tens of thousands even tried. That could mean life in Scotland’s rural areas is rosy… or it could mean the community buyout model is too daunting for all but the most threatened or determined island communities like Eigg. I’d opt for the latter explanation. &#xa0;Scotland still has one of the most concentrated patterns of landownership in Europe. The government cannot finance more than a few buyouts and individuals still cannot get their hands on small, affordable parcels of land. The ball is still in the court of the large landowner&#xa0;Yes&#xa0;October 2013