&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted (in a personal capacity) by Sophie Boyron, Senior Lecturer in Law, ]]]

[[[Birmingham Law School, ]]]

[[[University of Birmingham (CRJ 08)]]]&#xa0;

[[[Summary]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;In this evidence, I concentrate largely on issues raised by questions 3, 4 and 5. By way of introduction, I wish to state that the move to a codified constitution would not necessarily trigger a change in the role of the British judiciary. It would be possible to draft the provisions of the new constitution and ensure that the judiciary has the same attributions and the same constitutional position therein. For the role of the judiciary to change following the adoption of the codified constitution, it would mean one of two things: either the authors of the constitution took a decision to alter the role of the judiciary in the new document or despite the lack of formal change, the ‘codified’ constitutional environment triggered new political and/or judicial practices and an unforeseen transformation of the role and position of the judiciary. If the second situation requires a certain degree of ball gazing, it is important to note that this evolution is possible; new constitutional settlements have been known to trigger dynamics of constitutional change over and beyond the strict text of the constitution. There are plenty of comparative instances around the world of courts transforming their role and position beyond the ones contained in the constitutional document. &#xa0;While the move to a codified constitution would not necessarily change the role of the judiciary in itself, the adoption of a system of constitutional review has the potential to do so. In fact, the adoption of such a system raises such fundamental questions for the British constitution that it would likely transform it entirely. Already in the last decade, seeds of this transformation have been sown, and the adoption of a system of constitutional review would have the effect of confirming this evolutionary trend. &#xa0;Consequently, prior to addressing questions of constitutional design for such a system of review, it is important to identify the constitutional conditions that need to exist for a system of constitutional review to function satisfactorily. It is these ‘conditions’ or this constitutional environment that have the potential to affect the principle of parliamentary sovereignty and to transform the British constitution. &#xa0;&#xa0;As mentioned above, a certain constitutional environment needs to exist for a system of constitutional review to function and to be effective. However, to establish this environment, some fundamental decisions on the character and content of the codified constitution need to be made first. &#xa0;

[[[The p]]]

[[[rimacy of the codified constitution]]]The adoption of a system of constitutional review raises in turn the question of the primacy of the future constitution. It would be somewhat impossible for a full system of constitutional review to function were the codified constitution not granted primacy over Acts of Parliament. Only this higher status would give the necessary authority to the new constitution and to the system of constitutional review to ensure the compliance of Acts of Parliament with the provisions of the constitution. Consequently, the new codified constitution would need to be placed at the apex of the constitutional order (or in jurisprudential parlance, at the top of the ‘hierarchy of norms’). &#xa0;

[[[A Bill of Rights?]]]The second issue that should to be addressed to create an effective environment for constitutional review is the adoption of a Bill of Rights. While constitutional review could exist and function without a Bill of Rights, it would be severely curtailed. Traditionally, constitutional review ensures the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms. Indeed, without a Bill of Rights, the courts would only be able to ensure compliance with the procedural requirements of the legislative procedures or the constitutional principles clearly enounced in the constitution (such as the principle of independence of the judiciary). This would establish a very narrow system of constitutional review and one that would tend to concentrate on the political system, its various mechanisms and the relationship and balance of power between Government, Parliament and Judiciary. Traditionally, these areas are regulated efficiently by constitutional practices and conventions and although they would be codified in the new constitution, they may not benefit much from becoming the focus of the new system of constitutional review. &#xa0;Finally, were the constitution given primacy in the constitutional order and were a system of constitutional review be adopted, these would undermine the main tenets of the principle of parliamentary sovereignty. Not only would the courts be empowered to challenge the validity of Acts of Parliament but, they would no longer be held to have a somewhat inferior constitutional position to Parliament. The institutional balance inherent to the principle of parliamentary sovereignty would be compromised. &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;Whatever the choices made with regard to the issues adumbrated above, these will inform the design of the system of constitutional review. When designing a system of constitutional review, two main questions need to be addressed: the choice of judicial structure and the type of judicial remedies. &#xa0;

[[[Constitutional court v. ordinary courts]]]There are two main options when deciding on the judicial structure appropriate for a system of constitutional review: a specialized constitutional court (e.g. the German, Italian and Spanish systems of constitutional review) or a diffuse system of constitutional review through the control of ordinary courts (e.g. the system of constitutional review in the USA or in Greece). &#xa0;The organisation of a ‘diffuse’ system of constitutional review would not necessitate the creation of a new court and would only require some adjustments to the existing judicial processes and court structure. For instance, the constitutionality of an Act of Parliament relevant to the case could be challenged in all ordinary litigations.   &#xa0;However, the majority of European countries resort to constitutional courts. These specialized courts concentrate all constitutional litigation in one court and their decisions often have major political and societal implications. Consequently, constitutional courts can attract deep and repeated criticisms. When designing such a court, particular attention needs to be given to any aspect that may foster legitimacy; in particular both the membership and appointment system needs to be chosen carefully. For instance, in the context of the UK judicial system, it would be useful to move away from the limitations of the judicial appointment system and allow some lay members with relevant knowledge (e.g. political scientist or specialist in ethics) or professional experience (e.g. human rights campaigner of high standing). Furthermore, the relationship of the constitutional court with the ordinary courts would need to be organized carefully to ensure that cases requiring a constitutional ruling are referred easily to the constitutional court.&#xa0;On balance, the choice of a diffuse system of constitutional review may suit the British judicial system better. Also, there has never been much enthusiasm in the past for the creation of a specialized public law court. &#xa0;

[[[The remedies]]]If the codified constitution were granted a higher status, then the court(s) should have the power to strike down an unconstitutional Act of Parliament. In addition, the court(s) may need the power to modulate the effect of their ruling.&#xa0;However, to avoid the need for this type of modulation, the constitutionality of a bill could be checked before coming into force. This system of pre-enactment review would control the bill once adopted by Parliament and before receiving the Royal Assent. Accordingly, the court would be able able to ‘catch’ unconstitutional provisions before they had any legal effect. There would be no need to remedy the detrimental impact of an unconstitutional Act of Parliament and no scope for the modulation of the effect of a ruling of unconstitutionality. However, the system of pre-enactment review has some known drawbacks. First, the control is abstract and it is debatable whether any court in the circumstances can really identify all possible breaches of the constitution. Also, this control occurs immediately after a bill has been passed, when the political arguments for and against the text resounds around Parliament still. In this context, it can be difficult for the court charged with this review not to be tainted by ‘political’ association. It would be all the more difficult if the system of pre-enactment review is not automatic but if it is triggered by any number of elected representatives (e.g. the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the House of Commons, a number of MPs) as is often the case for this type of review. In fact, in many countries where it exists, pre-enactment review is regarded to be last obstacle the opposition can put across the path of bill. In view of the rather abstract nature of the litigation and the politicized environment in which it often operates, it is doubtful whether a system of pre-enactment review would take root easily in the United Kingdom.&#xa0;1 November 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; See instance, the US Supreme Court with Marbury v. Madison, 5 US 137 and the French Constitutional Council with the decision on Freedom of Association C Cons. 71-44 DC 16 July 1971 Liberté d’association.   Among these seeds one can point to the decision of R v. Sec. of State for transport, ex p. Factortame [1991] 1 AC 603, the Human Rights Act and the debate concerning the new category of ‘constitutional statutes’, see Laws LJ in Thoburn v. Sunderland City Council [2002] EWHC 195 (Admin). In fact, despite this evolution, the principle of parliamentary sovereignty has demonstrated great resilience. While it would be possible for the authors of the codified constitution to continue using the ECHR as a replacement for an endogenous Bill of Rights, it may not be desirable. For instance, it may be politically difficult to granting to the Convention the higher constitutional status necessary to ensure compliance all other Acts of Parliament. In France, the Constitutional Council can postpone the effect of its ruling to give time to Parliament to replace the unconstitutional legislation.  In France, some commentators have questioned whether all breaches of the constitution are really identified despite a robust pre-enactment review by the Constitutional Council. For example, in the French constitution, the right to have ordinary bills reviewed by the constitutional council is given to the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the Presidents of each chamber of Parliament, 60 members of the National Assembly (the first chamber of Parliament) or 60 members of the Senate (the second chamber of Parliament).