&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]Written evidence from the Ramblers (SLC 039)

[[[&#xa0;]]]Summary

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]Introduction&#xa0;1.              The Ramblers (the Ramblers’ Association) is a registered charity which seeks (among other things) to promote walking, both as a recreation and as the most sustainable form of transport. We also seek to promote the health, recreation and environmental benefits of walking, especially by protecting and extending the network of public paths and access in town and countryside, through lobbying, campaigning and voluntary practical work, and, since April 2012, through our partnership with Macmillan Cancer Support, in which we run the Walking for Health project, delivering strategic guidance for the England-wide health walks programme and providing schemes with such support and free resources as training, insurance, and national promotion. (The local schemes are run by a variety of organisations including councils, the NHS, charities and voluntary groups.)  In addition to supporting Walking for Health walks, we organise 45,000 led walks per year. 12,000 volunteers lead the walks; about 300,000 people take part in them. We have been organising these led walks since our formation in 1935.&#xa0;Improving the safety of rights of way level crossings&#xa0;2.              Pedestrian safety is of paramount importance to the Ramblers, and we do not under-estimate the potential dangers posed by crossing a railway line on the level.  However, we are of the view that a great deal could de done to improve the safety of rights of way level crossings.  For most public rights of way which cross a railway line on the level, the company’s (usually now Network Rail’s) obligations are set out in section 61 of the Railway Clauses Consolidation Act 1845.   This reads:&#xa0;

[[[61.]]]

[[[              ]]]

[[[Company to make sufficient approaches and fences to bridleways and footways crossing on the level.]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]If the railway shall cross any highway other than a public carriageway on the level, the company shall at their own expense, make and at all times maintain convenient ascents and descents and other convenient approaches, with handrails or other fences, and shall, if such highway be a  bridleway, erect and at all times maintain good and sufficient  gates, and if the same shall be a footway, good or sufficient gates or stiles, on each side of the railway, where the railway shall communicate therewith.&#xa0;3.              So, the railway company must make and maintain convenient approaches to the line and good and sufficient gates and stiles in the line side fences.  The duties can be enforced by application to a magistrates’ court using the procedure set out in section 65 of the same Act. However, they apply only if the 1845 Act was itself applied by the statute authorising the construction of the line. In some such statutes alternative or additional duties may have been imposed on the company.&#xa0;4.              The Ramblers is of the view that this aspect of level crossing legislation is in particular need of reform and simplification so that the obligations to maintain safe crossings are absolute.  There are many practical problems on rights of way level crossings which need addressing—poor visibility because of overgrown vegetation, stiles and gates on the approaches to lines not meeting the British Standard for Gaps, Gates and Stiles, poor surfaces at crossing points, etc.  Ideally there should be national standards for rights of way where they cross railway lines on the level.  In 2010 Defra issued guidance on “Authorising structures (gaps, gates &amp; stiles) on rights of way—good practice guidance for local authorities on compliance with the Equality Act 2010” and this should be referenced in any new standard.  Such a standard should include a requirement that, on high speed lines (for example, the East and West Coast Main Lines), telephones be provided at non-gated and landowner operated gates so that the approach of trains and safe-crossing times can be ascertained.  Additionally, all crossings should have a reference prominently displayed so that in case of an accident or incident the emergency services and other appropriate persons can be notified of the exact location.  It is our hope that many of these issues can be addressed by the implementation of the Law Commission’s recommendations, for example, those in respect of level crossing plans.&#xa0;5.              There should also be clear procedures to enable both railway staff and the public to report obstructions and damaged infrastructure on rights of way which cross railway lines, and the approaches to such crossings (the approach of both the right of way to the crossing point, as well as the approach of trains to that point).  The procedure should make clear the operating companies’ responsibility for rectifying problems, a timescale for doing so, and a clear response chain, i.e. a statement saying what work has been authorised, when the work is to be carried out, and notification to the complainant when it has been completed.  If it is decided not to act on the report then reasons for that decision should be given.&#xa0;6.              All signage used at footpath and bridleway level crossings should be reviewed to ensure that it can be understood by all (i.e. by the use of pictograms).  Such signage should be included in the Highway Code which does not, at present, offer instruction or information in respect of level crossings other than those which can be used by cars.  Signs needed for pedestrians include ‘obey flashing signals’ and  ‘do not cross when gates are shut’, ‘stop, look and listen’ and ‘phone to see if safe to cross’&#xa0;Closing public rights of way which cross railway lines&#xa0;7.              A major part of the work undertaken by Ramblers volunteers in England and Wales involves dealing with proposed changes to the rights of way network: diversion, extinguishment and, more rarely, creation orders made under the Highways Act and the Town and Country Planning Act, and orders made under the Transport and Works Act where the creation and extinguishment of rights of way is ancillary to the main purpose of the order (for example, the construction of a transport system).  Parliament has recognised the key role which the Ramblers and other path user groups play in protecting the integrity of the rights of way network by prescribing us to be served notice of orders to alter the public rights of way network made under these provisions.&#xa0;8.              In the context of level crossing safety, it should be noted that the Ramblers was highly instrumental in the introduction of Rail Crossing extinguishment and diversion orders under (new) sections 118A and 119A of the Highways Act 1980.  In “Rights of Way: a guide to law and practice”, Riddall and Trevelyan explain what happened:&#xa0;In November 1990 British Rail submitted to Parliament a Private Bill, the East Coast Main Line (Safety) Bill. If passed, this would have had the effect of closing ten level crossings over the East Coast Main Line, and thereby creating 20 cul-de-sac paths. Opposition from the Ramblers’ Association and other bodies helped to persuade MPs to block its progress through Parliament.Meanwhile the government was preparing its Transport and Works Bill to provide new procedures for authorisation of many of the works construction powers hitherto granted through the Private Bill procedure. It was sufficiently persuaded of the need for special powers to close or divert public paths crossing railways on the level to include in the Bill amendments to the Highways Act 1980.&#xa0;8.              From the point of view of the Ramblers, other voluntary groups working for the protection of public rights of way, and ordinary members of the public, the introduction of these provisions was an important reform.  It meant that we did not have to petition Parliament in respect of any Private Bills which sought to close or divert public rights of way which crossed railway lines.  However, as they stand, sections 118A and 119A are weaker in their protection of public rights than the standard provisions for closure and diversion of public rights of way as set out in sections 118 and 119 of the Highways Act 1980.  In respect of section 118A the weakness arises because there is no consideration of the use which the public are making of the route in question, either now or in the future.  In respect of section 119A, the tests of the suitability of the alternative route are weaker than under section 119—the point of termination of the alternative path does not have to be substantially as convenient to the public and there are no tests requiring the new route to be not substantially less convenient to the public, or requiring consideration to be given to public enjoyment or to the effect that the new route will have on the interests of those who own or occupy the land it crosses.9.              Because of this, we welcome the fact that the Law Commission is recommending a list of factors to be taken into account in considering an application for a level crossing closure order.  These are (as set out in the recently published report):&#xa0;of accidents at the level crossing);involved in closing or closing and replacing the crossing;crossings) on the efficiency of the rail and road networks;network of non-vehicular public rights of way;community;crossing users;

[[[&#xa0;]]]10.              Such a list goes some considerable way towards meeting our concerns about sections 118A and 119A, outlined above, which as presently drawn up do not address the effect of the proposed change on users of the highway in question.  We particularly welcome the inclusion of the fourth point, “the effect (in the case of public level crossings) on the integrity of the network of non-vehicular rights of way”, although we question whether the words ‘non-vehicular’ are needed.  The public rights of way network also encompasses restricted byways and byways open to all traffic which are open to vehicles but which are used largely by people on foot, horseback and pedal cycle.  It is also the case that users on foot, horseback and pedal cycle make use of the vehicular highway network and any level crossings which it encompasses and that a minor diversion for users of motor vehicles can be a very serious imposition on travel for non-motorised users.  Consideration of the effect of a level crossing closure or diversion must take into account the length and time needed to use any alternative route or routes.  In addition to considering the integrity of the network, we consider that the list should also include reference to the safety of the alternative route: non-motorised users may be no better off if they are forced away from a level crossing and on to a narrow country road with no footway.&#xa0;11.              The Ramblers, through its network of local volunteers, is always willing to meet Network Rail and relevant highway authorities to discuss changes to the rights of way network in the context of improving the safety of level crossings, new safety measures and alternative means of crossing such a bridges,&#xa0;Temporary closure of rights of way level crossings using inappropriate legislation12.              In recent years a problem has arisen, intimately linked to level crossing safety which has caused problems for rights of way users.  In a number of locations around the country (we know of examples in Essex, Kent, Surrey and Greater Manchester), local residents living in the vicinity of railway lines had complained about the loud noise made by the horns which train-drivers were required to sound when their train approached a level crossing.  At such locations there is a track-side sign known as a whistle board which usually says ‘whistle’ or ‘sound horn’ or ‘S.W.’ (= ‘sound whistle’).  However, an ingenious application of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 by relevant highway authorities, working with Network Rail, led to the closure of the paths in question by means of a traffic regulation order. The scenario that gives rise to it seems to be entirely artificial: Network Rail, by arrangement with the highway authority, removes the whistle boards, thus making the crossings ‘dangerous’, since users no longer get an audible warning of a train’s approach. So the traffic regulation order were made on grounds of safety; probably as a preliminary measure to seeking permanent closures or diversions under sections 118A and 119A of the Highways Act 1980.13.              The Ramblers is of the view that this is a totally inappropriate view of the powers contained in the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984. The highway authority has the duty of ensuring that all public rights of way are open and available for public use. Can it ever have been the case that Parliament intended TROs to be imposed where the ‘danger’ has been deliberately and artificially created by means of an arrangement to which the highway authority is party?14.              It seems to us that this is an entirely wrong approach to the problem.  The answer must be to make the crossings safer by means of the measures we describe in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 above or by making the horns quieter, or if there was no requirement for them to be used: a pedestrian who relied on them instead of looking to see if a train was coming would be cutting it pretty fine, given the slow speed of sound compared with the speed of trains. We find it surprising that they still rely on this form of warning, when there could be a system of lights, bleepers and so on triggered in the same way that the automatic barriers on vehicular crossings operate.The Law Commission and the Scottish Law Commission Level Crossings project15.              The Ramblers participated fully in this project, attending meetings of the stakeholder advisory group, corresponding with the Commission’s officers, and submitting a detailed response to the 2010 consultation paper.  We consider the recommendations in the final report to be an important step forward in securing safer level crossings.November 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;   The Ramblers’ Association is a registered charity (number 1093577) and a company limited by guarantee in England and Wales, founded as a voluntary body in 1935. Registered office: 2nd Floor, Camelford House, 87–90 Albert Embankment, London SE1 7TW. &#xa0; Published by the Ramblers and the Open Spaces Society, 4th edition, 2007