&#xa0;

[[[Written ]]]

[[[evidence ]]]

[[[submitted by Professor T H Pennington MB BS, PhD, ]]]

[[[FRCPath]]]

[[[(AMR0013)]]]&#xa0;Summary This evidence focuses on the application of next-generation DNA sequencing to the AMR problem. Whole genome sequencing of clinical isolates of pathogenic bacteria in real time will significantly improve our ability to 1) track their routes of transmission, 2) detect new resistant organisms and 3) identify targets for new antibiotics. I recommend that it should receive designated funding.&#xa0;I was Professor of Bacteriology at the University of Aberdeen from 1979 to 2003 and President of the Society for General Microbiology from 2003-2006. I chaired the Public Inquiry into the 2005 South Wales E.coli O157 outbreak, which published its report in 2009. I was appointed CBE in 2013 for services to microbiology and food hygiene, and am a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, and the Academy of Medical Sciences. I am President of MRSA Action UK.&#xa0;I have conducted research on several aspects of antibiotic action and resistance, including the inhibition of smallpox replication by rifampicin, MRSA fingerprinting, and the molecular basis of the resistance of Neisseria meningitidis to rifampicin. A particular focus of my work has been the development and application of molecular fingerprinting methods to track the spread of pathogens.&#xa0;1.Whole genome sequencing on a routine basis of large numbers of clinical isolates of pathogenic bacteria is now possible. In the last decade the cost and turn round time of DNA sequencing has fallen like a stone. In 2001 sequencing a human genome cost $100M. It now costs $8,000. The rate of fall of costs began to outpace Moore’s Law for computers (the number of transistors on an integrated circuit doubles every two years) in January 2008 with the introduction of next-generation sequencing methods&#xa0;2.The power and utility of next-generation sequencing was illustrated by studies on the enormous outbreak of bloody diarrhoea and the haemolytic uraemic syndrome in Germany (well over 4,000 cases and 50 deaths) and a smaller one in France caused by E.coli O104:H4 (Grad,YH, Lipsitch M &amp; 32 others (2012) Genomic epidemiology of the Escherichia coli O104:H4 outbreaks in Europe, 2011. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:3065-3070.) These authors concluded ‘this study argues strongly for multiple genome sequences to understand patterns of transmission within an outbreak, Such analyses can already be conducted in a matter of days, and technological advances will only improve our ability to perform them in real time….As this example demonstrates, the results of such analysis, combined with traditional epidemiology, can raise novel epidemiologic hypotheses and questions that are available through sequencing of multiple isolates’.&#xa0;3. There is still much uncertainty regarding the routes of transmission of many important pathogens. A good example is Staphylococcus aureus. Although much progress has been made in reducing the incidence of MRSA infections, this has now levelled off  (the Public Health England Quarterly Analyses of Mandatory Staphylococcus aureus bacteraemia published on September 2013 says for MRSA ‘The total number of MRSA bacteraemia reports has shown a small increase of 6% when compared to the same period last year – from 224 in Q2 2012 to 237 in Q2 2013.’)  Staphylococcus aureus ( and coagulase negative staphylococci) are by far the commonest causes of infections following hip surgery. It is not possible to identify with any degree of certainty either the route of transmission or the source of the infecting organism in many patients infected with these organisms. In my view the uncertainty that still exists regarding the source and transmission routes of pathogens comes from a failure to investigate the epidemiology of such cases using modern methods. By far the most important priority for clinical microbiology is to provide information relevant to the management of the patient from whom samples were taken; but it hardly ever goes further. An enormous number of isolates of pathogens is made in the NHS every year. I consider that the application of next-generation sequencing of whole genomes to some of these isolates on a significant scale coupled with the clinical information that accompanies them and traditional epidemiology, is likely to improve our understanding of their sources and routes of transmission, and the evolution of antibiotic resistance mechanisms and their spread, by orders of magnitude. In turn it is highly likely that such advances will provide evidence that in turn will enhance our ability to detect, understand and control AMR organisms.&#xa0;4. I consider that this would make a material and rapid contribution to one of the three strategic aims of the UK 5 Year Antimicrobial Resistance Strategy 2013-2018 : ‘Improving the knowledge and understanding of AMR’. This document mentions whole genome sequencing in para 4.7, 4.12 and 5.3 and recommends that its development and uptake be promoted by Research Councils, other research funders, and academics. But funding for it is not identified in the AMR strategy impact assessment. It is possible that some projects using it will be conducted or supported by the proposed National Institute for Health Research Health Protection Unit on AMR and Health Care Associated Infections. However, I consider that next-generation whole genome sequencing of bacterial genomes is so likely to deliver benefits regarding AMR that it should be identified for specific support.&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;