&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry (]]]

[[[ABPI]]]

[[[)]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[Antibiotics Network (AMR0014)]]]The ABPI Antibiotics Network (ABPI AN) comprises a number of ABPI member companies brought together by their shared interest in antibiotics.  The Network is formed of the following companies: Astellas Pharma LtdAstraZenecaGlaxoSmithKline UKJohnson &amp; JohnsonLeo Laboratories LimitedMerck Sharp &amp; Dohme LimitedNovartis Pharmaceuticals UK LtdPfizerQuintiles&#xa0;Executive SummaryThe ABPI Antibiotics Network welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Science and Technology Committee Inquiry into antimicrobial resistance (AMR).   The increased national focus on AMR is wholly appropriate given the growing intensity of the challenge but there is still some way to go to ensure a coherent and coordinated response that maximises the chances of success.  The Government’s 5 Year AMR Strategy sets out most of the key issues but the development and execution of a targeted action plan is essential, particularly in relation to the commercial environment for incentivising and rewarding the research and development of novel antibiotics.  The UK should seek to take a leading role in developing European and international solutions to the issues raised in the Government’s Strategy, including pricing. The ABPI AN would be delighted to work with the Science and Technology Committee and other stakeholders to inform the direction of the interdepartmental High Level Steering Group and future activity in relation to AMR.&#xa0;1. How has antimicrobial resistance developed in the past decade?1.1              The last decade has seen antimicrobial resistance continue to emerge across entire classes of antibiotics including β‐lactams, quinolones, tetracyclines, glycopeptides and macrolides.  Between 2000 and 2011 early accounts of resistance were identified in XDR tuberculosis (2000); linezolid-R Staphylococcus (2001); Vancomycin-R Staphylococcus (2002); PDR-Acinetobacter (2004/5); Pseudomonas (2004/5); Ceftriaxone-R Neisseria gonorrhoeae (2009); and PDR-Enterobacteriaceae ceftriaxone: R-staphylococci (2011).  In the same period significantly fewer novel systemic antibiotics were successfully introduced to market.1.2              Antimicrobial resistance was once the specific problem of hospitals and nursing homes but recent years have seen a rise in community-acquired resistant infections including tuberculosis, skin infections and sexually transmitted infections such as gonorrhea.1.3              The rise in multidrug resistance (MDR) is global and increasing.  In common with climate change, the rate of change and the magnitude of the effect on patients and society are unknown.   However, according to Dame Sally Davies the MDR issue will have an impact on us much sooner than climate change.Resistance case study: carbapenems1.4               Carbapenems are a class of broad based, last-line antibiotics which is vital for the treatment of infections caused by multi-resistant, gram-negative bacteria.  Although the occurrence of carbapenem-resistant bacteria is rare, cases are increasing.  This is concerning because the resultant infections are resistant to the majority of available antibiotics.   1.5               Prescribing behaviours, which have too often relied on single classes of antibiotics, have had a direct impact on the development of resistance in carbapenems.  A lack of diversity in antibiotic classes used to meet healthcare acquired infection (HCAI) targets, which initially relied too heavily on cepahalosporins and quinolones, has been offset by increased use of critically important antibiotics, such as carbapenems.  This has resulted in an increased resistance in carbapenamase-producing organisms.  2. What are the gaps in our knowledge about antimicrobial resistance?2.1               Hospital based reporting of resistant infections has improved markedly over the last decade.  However, there is still not a complete picture of incidence, prevalence, mortality and the cost of resistance.  The lack of data is especially problematic at a community level, where not all care settings systematically monitor antibiotic resistance.  2.2               The surveillance and reporting of cases of resistance, even in hospitals, is not sufficiently comprehensive or joined-up.  The national picture of resistance relies heavily on independent sentry surveillance schemes such as the BSAC’s resistance surveillance programme or the ECDC EARS-net project.  2.3               Knowledge gaps about the development of AMR could be improved through the introduction of a central repository which captures local data on all isolates that are cultured in the lab and for which antimicrobial susceptibility is determined.  This could potentially be linked to electronic prescribing databases and the Clinical Practice Research Datalink.3. Is there sufficient research and investment into new antibiotics or other treatments and methods to ensure continued protection against infection? If not, how could this be rectified?3.1               From an industry perspective, a number of factors hinder investment in the research and development of antibiotics.  In particular, prevailing regulatory and financial frameworks fail to recognise the value of antibiotics and the unique considerations associated with their development.  Clinical Trials3.2               Regulatory requirements around establishing and conducting clinical trials have contributed to an increase in costs and delayed time to market, which impacts on remaining patent life once a product is launched.  Whilst this is the case for all pharmaceutical products, it is particularly challenging in the case of antibiotics.  The result has been a significant decline in the approval of antibacterials in Europe and the USA.  3.3               This is in part due to the difficultly of recruiting a sufficient number of patients with the appropriate bacterial infections to clinical trials, a problem that is compounded by the lack of rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) to quickly identify participants.  Although antibiotics tend to be developed for general use in the population, similar challenges to those seen in stratified medicine and rare diseases are encountered as trials require very specific research participants who can be hard to identify.  3.4               Another hurdle in recruiting people for clinical trials is that sepsis is often a component of entry criteria, meaning that trial participants tend to be very unwell and not responding to other treatments.  The slow speed of progression through clinical research phases reflects these challenges.  Return on Investment:3.5               Companies are reluctant to invest in antibiotic R&amp;D, as the returns are significantly lower than alternative investment areas.  This is driven by a combination of the price and the volume of the product likely to be used.  Additional uncertainty compared with other disease areas is due to the unpredictable patterns of resistance development.    &#xa0;3.6               Antibiotics are generally expected by payers to be low cost medicines, in part because the majority are now generic, and also because in the past they have been taken by lots of people, often for a short duration (usually not more than 14-21 days).  &#xa0;3.7              Whereas payers often cover the cost of expensive, life-extending drugs in other therapy areas, antibiotics tend to be viewed differently.  This low value ascribed to antibiotics is despite the fact that antibiotics play an important role in modern medicine, enabling survival and either treating or supporting the treatment (eg many surgical procedures) of a myriad of conditions that allow people to return to full health, restoring quality of life and ensuring they can remain productive members of society. &#xa0;3.8               The reality is that novel antibiotics will need to be used prudently, meaning lower market volumes on launch, ie during the patent-protected period when companies make a return on their considerable investment.  In some cases, novel antibiotics might only be used in exceptional circumstances, such as when patients have not responded to other antibiotics.  &#xa0;3.9               Industry is therefore faced with the unattractive commercial challenge of producing antimicrobials at high cost with long lead times and uncertainty of success, with the expectation that unit cost should be low, but also with a focus on preventing resistance through careful prescribing and low usage rates.  &#xa0;Possible Approaches:3.10              The ABPI Antibiotic Network considers that alternative approaches to antibiotic pricing and regulation need to be considered, albeit within the scope of European and global frameworks.  The successful development of new antibiotics will be expedited only if regulation and pricing can be designed to both adequately assess a new antibiotic’s safety and efficacy, and also grant timely approval to deliver that antibiotic to market at a price that reflects its value.  3.11              As Professor Dame Sally Davies says in the Chief Medical Officer’s Annual report “In short, there are fewer economic incentives to produce new antimicrobial agents than there are for other classes of drug – a market failure.”  This market therefore requires a radically different approach to purchasing arrangements if novel antibiotics are to be successfully brought to market. 3.12               Decoupling sales volume from pricing in a way that appropriately shares risk between the purchaser and industry will be essential to stimulate the market.  Alternative approaches might include insurance premium type arrangements, the upfront purchase of novel antibiotics by national governments upon successful regulatory approval, or license fee models agreed at a national level.  3.13               Other regulatory mechanisms are being investigated.  For example, earlier registration has been proposed for narrow spectrum antibiotics, active against some of the MDR gram negative pathogens.  Both the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the US and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) appear to have agreed that these antibiotics could be registered for use against MDR pathogens only.  This would lead to earlier introductions after a small clinical programme, possibly of a few hundred patients, rather than the many thousands of patients required to date.  3.14              Consideration of regulation and incentives remains a key component of a balanced approach to the challenge of AMR and should not be allowed to fall off the agenda at national or international level.  Network members would be happy to discuss further any of the pricing and regulatory approaches raised in this submission.  4. What measures (including behavioural change) have been most effective in controlling the spread of resistant pathogens, and could such measures be used to control other pathogens? Infection Control: Targets4.1               Infection control is fundamental to managing AMR in clinical settings and since 2001, government targets have been very successful in increasing accountability and awareness and reducing cases of MRSA and C.difficile across NHS Trusts.  However, we are concerned that targets are no longer aligned with some of the biggest emerging threats such as MSSA and E-Coli, neither of which are subject to 2013/14 national performance measures. The downgrading of mandatory surveillance of organisms such as Vancomycin resistant enterococcus is also cause for concern. National performance measures should be reassessed to ensure that they are appropriately targeted.&#xa0;Stewardship4.2              Stewardship plays a central role in deterring AMR and controlling the spread of resistant pathogens.  The Network fully recognises the need for careful management of antimicrobials and believes that the slogan “the right drug, the right dose, at the right time and the right duration” provides a helpful illustration of what good stewardship programmes should look like.  It is also important that stewardship programmes consider whether clinical outcomes have been improved and keep track of any adverse events and emergence of antibiotic resistance. For example, there is evidence that while current national performance measures for MRSA and C.diff have successfully lowered infection rates, they have also led to perverse prescribing behaviours that are driving an over-reliance on critical, last-line antibiotics (as discussed above).  4.3               Optimum antibiotic prescribing requires a fundamental understanding of the key principles of microbiology and the unwanted consequences of antibiotic use.  For example, waiting to use antibiotics as a last resort can allow infections to develop and patients to deteriorate.  In contrast, programmes such as the Surviving Sepsis Campaign, advocate de-escalation, where patients are given a highly potent agent with broad cover and then rapidly switched to antimicrobials with a narrower spectrum - as the underlying pathogen, resistance patterns, and the patient’s response to treatment become clear - tend to deliver stronger patient outcomes.  4.4               In existing stewardship programmes, many of the fundamental issues related to antimicrobial resistance are not addressed adequately.  Too often, antibiotics alone are relied upon to treat infections in situations where other interventions are available.  Greater understanding of pathogenesis and the contribution of different interventions (e.g. diagnostics, other antibiotics and surgery) is vital.  Multi-disciplinary teams are considered effective in managing complex infections due to the range of expertise brought to bear.  Communication between primary and secondary care also plays an important role in avoiding unnecessary admissions, facilitating earlier discharge and supporting de-escalation of antibiotic treatment and retaining clinical knowledge about the use of antibiotics in particular patients. 4.5               Stewardship must also incorporate diverse antibiotics as a way of preventing resistance. Historically this has been difficult to implement due to an over-reliance on beta-lactams and the paucity of alternatives with novel modes of action.  By introducing a more diversified approach to prescribing, moving away from over-reliance on any single class, the link between selection and resistance could be weakened and risk of transmission minimised.  This could also incentivise industry to develop agents with new modes of action rather than developing new generations of existing classes.   4.6               The pricing of antibiotics also has a significant impact on incentivising healthcare professionals’ to implement good stewardship practices.  The comparatively low cost of even highly effective treatments can mean that their use is not always as judicious as would be desired.  &#xa0;NICE Quality Standard4.7               We welcome the announcement made in the Strategy that NICE will develop a Quality Standard on antibiotic stewardship.  This has the potential to promulgate a more uniform understanding of what good antibiotic stewardship means.  A successful Quality Standard will require input from those with a deep understanding of the complexities of antimicrobial stewardship including prescribers, academics in the field and industry.  5. What global coordination and action is required to fight antimicrobial resistance and is the UK contributing enough towards cross-border initiatives?5.1               We recognise the international dimension of the AMR challenge.  The publication of the Strategy and the impetus provided by the Chief Medical Officer’s interest in the subject puts the UK in an ideal position to assume a leading role in the field of AMR, drawing on its heritage of antibiotic discovery and development.  Any changes to the national system would need to be mirrored internationally in order for genuine progress to be made.  UK-developed frameworks might be proposed to an international coalition to ensure maximum impact.&#xa0;5.2               UK co-authorship of a WHO Resolution is an important step, but will require political coalition building and ongoing dialogue with global institutions to ensure follow through and implementation of the recommendations.  &#xa0;5.3              Work conducted through international organisations, such as the Innovative Medicines Initiative, is vital and the UK should seek to support these and work collaboratively where possible to avoid duplication of effort.&#xa0;6. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the Government’s 2013-2018 strategy for tackling antimicrobial resistance? What changes might be made to further strengthen the Government’s action plan?6.1               The Government’s five year AMR Strategy is a useful platform to start addressing some key issues in the area of antimicrobial resistance and contains a balanced assessment of the challenge.  Network members were especially pleased to see that stewardship (discussed above) and the development of new antibiotics, and diagnostic and novel therapies have been picked up as central themes.  However, the document lacks detail in some areas of the action plan. 6.2               In particular, the Strategy falls short of considering in detail how the commercial environment will be improved to incentivise and reward the discovery and development of new antibiotics.  While the Strategy places significant obligations on industry to produce new treatments, it does so without offering reciprocal commitments to improve the commercial environment6.3               The Government must set out concretely how it plans to analyse the challenges associated with AMR further and translate these, in collaboration with stakeholders, into initiatives that will drive real change.  In addressing the commercial environment, the High Level Steering Group (HLSG) must outline how it plans to tackle some of the key challenges which it started to identify in the Strategy.   6.4               ABPI Antibiotics Network members are committed to contributing to the fight against AMR and to the success of the Government’s Strategy and would encourage ongoing engagement with relevant stakeholders from the outset.  A genuinely collaborative approach is essential to tackle the myriad issues related to AMR.  Members would welcome the opportunity to work with the HLSG to elucidate issues where they have a unique insight and further develop the UK’s response to the AMR challenge.Key RecommendationsNovember 2013&#xa0;Web references throughout this report were accessed in October 2013. Mossialos, E., Morel, C., Edwards, S., Berenson J., Gemmill-Toyama M. and Brogan, D. (2010) Policies and incentives for promoting innovation in antibiotic research: www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/120143/E94241.pdf, p11.  Health Protection Agency (2012) Drug resistant TB on the increase: www.hpa.org.uk/NewsCentre/NationalPressReleases/2012PressReleases/120705DrugresistantTBincrease/. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2013) Antibiotic resistance threats in the United States, 2013: www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/threat-report-2013/pdf/ar-threats-2013-508.pdf, p34. Health Protection Agency (2013) New action plan launched to combat emerging threat of untreatable gonorrhoea in England and Wales: www.hpa.org.uk/NewsCentre/NationalPressReleases/2013PressReleases/130227Newactionplanlaunched/.  Health Service Journal (March 2013) CMO notes “catastrophic” antimicrobial resistance: www.hsj.co.uk/topics/public-health/cmo-notes-catastrophic-antimicrobial-resistance/5055990.article. The British Society of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, BSAC resistance surveillance programme:  www.bsac.org.uk/surveillance/bsac-resistance-surveillance-programme/. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, European antimicrobial resistance surveillance network (EARS-Net): www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/activities/surveillance/EARS-Net/Pages/index.aspx. Bax R. (2012) Introduction to antibacterial resistance, p9 Buckland Merrett, G. (2013) Tackling antibiotic resistance for greater global health security: www.chathamhouse.org/sites/default/files/public/Research/Global%20Health/1013bp_antibioticresistance.pdfChief Medical Officer (2011) Volume 2, 2011: Infections and the rise of antimicrobial resistance, www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/138331/CMO_Annual_Report_Volume_2_2011.pdf, p20.  Health Protection Agency, Mandatory surveillance of Staphylococcus aureus bacteraemia: www.hpa.org.uk/web/HPAweb&amp;Page&amp;HPAwebAutoListName/Page/1191942169773. NHS (2012) The Operating Framework for the NHS in England, 2012/13: www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/216590/dh_131428.pdf. Members have evidence that current national performance measures have led to perverse prescribing behaviours and are driving an over-reliance on critical, last-line antibiotics.   15  Annual Report of the Chief Medical Officer Volume Two, 2011. Infections and the rise of antimicrobial resistance. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/138331/CMO_Annual_Report_Volume_2_2011.pdf. Surviving Sepsis Campaign (2012) Surviving sepsis campaign: international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock: http://www.sccm.org/Documents/SSC-Guidelines.pdf.