&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from the Pensions Ombudsman [PHS0033]]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;Thank you for your September letter about PASC's enquiries into complaints handling, in which you ask for my views on eight questions.&#xa0;Before I respond to the questions, I should perhaps make it clear that I am replying personally and in my capacity as the holder of the joint posts of Pensions Ombudsman and Pension Protection Fund Ombudsman. I am also presently Chair of the Ombudsman Association (formerly known as the British and Irish Ombudsman Association). I am not representing the Association's views in this letter.&#xa0;1 . How do you share good practice with other Ombudsmen, to improve processes and customer service?&#xa0;We have contacts with other ombudsmen's offices at several levels in the organisation. We informally benchmark what we do against comparable ombudsmen through awareness of their and our KPIs. More formal benchmarking is difficult because of differences in jurisdictions, size of office, overall purpose etc. We use our network of friends in other bodies to gain awareness of work that they are doing and inform them of our work. We are active in the Ombudsman Association, which holds operational seminars and workshops that give further insight (for example there is a seminar on quality in early December, with presentations from five offices).&#xa0;2. What are your views on the creation of a single access point for complaints to all ombudsmen? &#xa0;I do not think as single access point is practicable, for the following reasons.&#xa0;Whilst most ombudsmen's jurisdiction can be simply expressed - "Housing", "Legal Services", "Pensions", "Local Government" etc - actual jurisdictions are often highly complex, particularly at the margins. And in matters such as discretion *ether to investigate, pre-requisites for acceptance, time limits and so-on there are significant differences. There is a separate question about whether these complexities are desirable, but while they exist a single access point could not properly deal with every office's remit and powers without dividing up its expertise and replicating, at least in part, present arrangements of specialists in each ombudsman's work — even if at a single location, either real or virtual. That being so, the sought for benefit of single access is lost. In effect the single access point would be a conglomerate of the front ends of each office, with the same boundary questions and cross referrals as exist at present.&#xa0;As an associated point, the different jurisdictions mean that different information is needed to decide whether a complaint can be dealt with, so the application process could not be easily harmonised.&#xa0;Existing statutory jurisdictions may place limits on delegation of decisions and discretions about jurisdiction, so that they can only be made by the office's own staff. Non statutory schemes might need rule changes which they could not be compelled to make — and no office could be compelled to participate in the single access point. So legislation would be necessary to achieve comprehensive coverage. Without comprehensive coverage the effectiveness of a single access point would be impaired.&#xa0;A solution to the difficulties above might be that the single access point would do no more than point towards the ombudsman likely to be able to deal with the matter. But then each ombudsman's office would have to follow up with much the same work as at present. So the single access point would add an extra tier. It would be little more than an optional portal —which may well be worth considering but is probably not what the Committee had in mind in asking the question.&#xa0;3. What are your views on whether or not there should be a single public services ombudsman in England, as there is in Scotland and Wales?&#xa0;I would be in favour. There is sufficient similarity of jurisdiction for there to be benefits in terms of efficiency, ease of access and clarity for the public. The arrangement works well in Scotland and Wales. The one impediment to clarity is that there would be some no-devolved matters concerning Scotland and Wales that need a home. Whilst the English public services ombudsman might seem the logical place for them (because they are presently with PHSO) that is not the only solution.&#xa0;4. What consideration have you given to the introduction of an EU Directive on ADR and are you taking any action in response.&#xa0;We are at the early stages of considering its impact on us (but very aware that implementation is in early 2015). We have raised it with our sponsor department (DWP). Our present view is that our procedures and jurisdiction are compliant (or can easily be made to be). The bigger questions are (a) whether there are relevant contracts and services not covered by ADR entities at present which should be brought within our scope and (b) whether processes adopted by new ADR entities in addition to the Directive's requirements will change the public's expectations of our own service.&#xa0;5. To what extent do you think the Directive will allow better and meaningful comparisons in performance and sharing of practice across providers or agencies?&#xa0;It would if there was proliferation of ombudsmen with similar characteriStics. (I mention above the difficulties of benchmarking amongst ombudsmen with very different characteristics). But proliferation is not in the public interest (see below).&#xa0;6. To what extent the Directive presents an opportunity to remodel the existing system of ADR to resolve possible existing overlaps, shortfalls and conflicts?&#xa0;On its own there is a risk that the Directive will result in proliferation with additional overlaps, shortfalls and conflicts. In my view there needs to be a clear stance that the Government does not expect that there should not be more than one ADR provider in any business sector and that where there are sectoral similarities there should be a single provider across sectors. Existing providers should be used where possible (but not in such a way as to encourage their jurisdictions to reach into very different services). See answer to question 8, below.&#xa0;7. How can those involved in dispute resolution, but who aren't covered by the Directive, ensure that they are meeting the same expected standards of quality as those who are covered by it?&#xa0;The question assumes that the expected standards under the directive are higher than those that would apply without it. I'm not at all sure that premise is correct — certainly amongst ombudsman schemes.&#xa0;8. How can the government ensure against the proliferation of excessive numbers of different dispute resolution bodies and mechanisms (and should it be doing so)?&#xa0;See my answer to question 6 above. It is less than clear that the Government can do more than discourage proliferation, since the directive does not place limits on the number of schemes registered with the "competent authority(ies)". However opinion formers, such as media and consumer bodies are likely to oppose the idea of competitive ADR entities and the Government should adopt the same position. Suppliers of goods and services are likely to be supportive too, since a simpler landscape, with entities maximising economies of scale, is in their interests.&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;