&#xa0;

[[[Letter to the Chair of the Committee from the Prime Minister]]]I said that I would write on a number of issues raised with me during my appearance at the Liaison Committee on 10 September.

[[[Science and Technology Reports (question 14)]]]Andrew Miller asked whether I would look again at the recommendations in the Science and Technology Select Committee report on The Census and Social Science.The Office of National Statistics (ONS) has recently launched a consultation on the future of the Census. This runs until 13 December. The ONS will publish its findings in 2014. I am assured that it will take into account all views expressed, including the recommendations of the Science and Technology Committee.Andrew Miller also asked whether I would look again at the recommendations in the Science and Technology Select Committee report on Bridging the Valley of Death: improving the commercialisation of research.The Government response to the report agreed with many of its observations about the importance of a strong and well-functioning research base in the UK. It also recognised the vital importance of successfully commercialising research in order to gain full economic benefit from such an area of strength. There were some recommendations where the Government response explained that other more appropriate measures were either already, or could in future be, put in place.Andrew Miller also raised the recommendations in the Science and Technology report on Malware and Cybercrime.The report was a welcome contribution to the debate on this issue. The Government’s response accepted the majority of the Committee’s recommendations — for example, the need to make it easier for the public and businesses to report cybercrime, and to raise public and business awareness of how to protect themselves more effectively online. There were some recommendations, for example in relation to safety standards on software, that the Government has taken forward in a different way in order to achieve the same aim.The significant steps taken on these issues were set out in the Government’s evidence to the recent inquiry into e-crime by the Home Affairs Select Committee (HASC). The Government will shortly publish its response to HASC’s report.

[[[Decentralisation (question 16)]]]Clive Betts asked for an annual report on departmental progress on decentralisation.As I set out in my letter to the Committee on 6 June, we do not intend to produce a separate annual report as I am satisfied that there is already sufficient reporting. The Open Public Services Team under Oliver Letwin and David Laws are publishing annual reports on the Open Public Services White Paper, including what has been done on decentralisation. Departments will also continue to report against their structural reform plans.The Government continues to make great steps to decentralise power and money. For example, the Spending Round underlined our commitment to the devolution of economic powers from central government to local areas, bringing at least £20 billion under the strategic influence of Local Enterprise Partnerships in the years to 2021.

[[[Major Projects Authority (question 27)]]]Margaret Hodge asked about plans to implement Lord Browne’s review into major projects — Getting a grip.Lord Browne examined what further lessons we could draw from the private sector and how we could strengthen the Major Projects Authority (MPA). In response to this, MPA has developed a strategy to be implemented in phases by Quarter 4 of 2013/14. It is vital that projects are scoped, resourced and designed effectively from the outset. One of the first recommendations being implemented is the strengthening of the assurance process from the start of the project to ensure that it mirrors best practice in the private sector.Margaret Hodge also asked about MPA oversight of Department for Education programmes. The £2.5 billion Priority School Building Programme is our major capital investment programme to rebuild dilapidated schools. It falls within the ambit of the MPA. I know the Education Funding Authority has welcomed the support and advice of MPA, including the leadership training that MPA has supported. The Programme is delivering ahead of schedule and securing savings of some 40 per cent on the capital costs of the previous Administration’s programme.

[[[G4S —]]]

[[[ Serious Fraud Office report (question 33)]]]Keith Vaz raised the issue of Government contracts with G4S, and asked about the timetable for the Serious Fraud Office (SFO) reporting its findings to the Ministry of Justice.The timescale on when the SFO will report back to the Ministry of Justice is a matter for the SFO to consider independently of Government. Chris Grayling has committed to keep Parliament informed as and when he is able to do so.We are clear that new business can only be awarded where the integrity of the contracts and the conduct of suppliers can be assured. Work continues on the independent audit of every Ministry of Justice contract with Serco and G4S, announced by Chris Grayling in July, and on the wider review announced by Francis Maude of all contracts held by Serco and G4S across Government. Serco also agreed in August to undertake a process of corporate renewal, which will be subject to an assessment by a Government committee, including non-executive directors, at the end of November.

[[[Forensic Science Service (question 36)]]]Andrew Miller asked about a strategy for forensic sciences across Government.The Forensic Policy Group was established in 2012 in order to ensure a joined-up approach on the key issues on forensic science. It includes representatives from the Police, Crown. Prosecution Service, Ministry of Justice, the Department of Health, the Home Office, and the Ministry of Defence.The provision of forensic services through a commercial market is working. As I said during my appearance, the Forensic Science Service was allowed to maintain a cost base that was far too high under the previous Government. As a result, the company was unable to compete with its commercial rivals, and was making heavy losses. The current commercial providers meet exactly the same quality standards as the Forensic Science Service did, but do not require public funding of £2 million a month.The Government will respond in more detail on our approach to forensic science later this month in our response to the Science and Technology Committee’s inquiry.

[[[Expertise and Skills (question 59)]]]Clive Betts asked about the skills and expertise in the Treasury to deliver infrastructure guarantees and the Help to Buy scheme.As the Chancellor set out in the Budget, to drive forward infrastructure delivery we need the best people for the job. Infrastructure UK was set up in 2010 as a unit within the Treasury to work on the UK’s long-term infrastructure priorities and secure private sector investment. It is largely staffed by commercial and finance professionals who have been recruited from top private sector companies.Infrastructure UK’s staff includes a team of ten infrastructure finance specialists with between 8 and 26 years of experience in financing complex projects in the UK and abroad. These commercial and delivery experts and finance professionals have proven track records.The Treasury has developed Help to Buy, in close co-operation with industry and regulators, to ensure that the scheme received the right technical input. In addition, the Treasury procured specialist advice from a major accountancy firm to determine the correct commercial scheme.The Government has also appointed UK Asset Resolution (UKAR) to take responsibility for the day-to-day administration of Help to Buy on behalf of the Treasury. UKAR is a Government-owned entity managed by financial experts with a strong understanding of the UK mortgage market, especially in modelling and managing risk.The organisation was established to manage the wind-down of the mortgage books of Northern Rock and Bradford &amp; Bingley and has demonstrated continued good management of this task.I am copying this letter to Andrew Miller MP, Clive Betts MP, Margaret Hodge MP and Keith Vaz MP.15 October 2013&#xa0;