&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[the National Office of Animal Health (NOAH) Ltd]]]

[[[ (AMR0019)]]]SummaryIntroduction1. NOAH Ltd. is the trade association for the UK veterinary medicines sector and represents approximately 90% of the companies that manufacture and market licensed animal medicines. The industry is small compared to the human medicines sector.  The most recent survey commissioned by the European veterinary medicines trade association stated that  the sector globally ‘has moved from an estimated $18.6B to over $20B in 2010 and circa $21B for 2011, about 2.5% of the global human health market (estimated at $800B)’. (1) The UK veterinary medicines market reflects this ratio. 2. NOAH supports the need for united action, and welcomes the publication of the UK Department of Health’s 5 Year Antimicrobial resistance Strategy.  3.               How has antimicrobial resistance developed in the past decade?While resistance in human medicine is believed to have deteriorated over the last decades, overall resistance to target animal pathogens is currently not causing significant problems in veterinary practice with the therapeutic options available at present. However, well-designed resistance surveillance is scarce in the veterinary field. In the late nineties, Research-based Industry through The European Animal Health Study Centre (CEESA) has set up an isolate collection and susceptibility testing programme throughout the EU using validated and harmonised methodology; the collection includes veterinary pathogens, commensals and zoonotic bacteria (2). It should be noted that this program is unique in the EU; similar and/or more extensive programs are urgently needed to ensure early detection of any trends in decreased susceptibility in these organisms.&#xa0;&#xa0;4.              What are the gaps in our knowledge about antimicrobial resistance?4.1 Research is required into the pathways in which resistance is transmitted.    This arose at the conference titled ‘Antimicrobial Resistance in Human and Veterinary Medicine – one medicine, one problem?’, organised by the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons and the Royal College of Physicians in association with the Health Protection Agency and the Veterinary Medicines Directorate in October 2012. 4.2 A key conclusion was the need for veterinary and medical professionals to work together, taking a ‘One Health’ approach to antimicrobial resistance and how society should handle this threat.   Key conclusions were as follows;•              The issue of acquisition, evolution and transmission of AMR is complex and involves human and domestic animal populations (both food animal species and non-food companion animal species), but also wildlife and the environment. It is important to understand how these factors interact, particularly with increasing international movement of people, food and animals.  •              In an increasingly connected world, it is evident that any measures need to tackle global use. The probability that selection for resistance will occur where antimicrobial usage is highest and least controlled, coupled with unprecedented mobility of humans, means that, whether AMR originates from animal use or human use, the threats in Britain and in Europe will often emanate from outside. Strategies in the UK in human and veterinary medicine must recognise this. (3)4.3 In addition, the drivers of resistance in human and animal pathogens and commensals are poorly understood5.               Is there sufficient research and investment into new antibiotics or other treatments and methods to ensure continued protection against infection? If not, how could this be rectified?5.1 In the veterinary sector, the current negative regulatory climate and uncertainty acts as a major disincentive for companies to invest in the development of new antibiotics or alternatives.  Many of the measures proposed by different parties for changes to the regulation of veterinary medicines refer to the use of the precautionary principle, bans of classes of antibiotics and limitations on the use of existing and any new antibiotics. In this respect, the European Commission’s Action Plan communicated in November 2011 (COM2011/748) contributes greatly to the current legislative vacuum. The development of a new veterinary medicine takes a long time (8 to 12 years on average) and costs a significant amount, especially when failed research projects that do not result in a product reaching the market are considered.  To justify research costs companies need to be confident that they will obtain a return on investment.  5.2 The European Veterinary Medicines Directive is currently under review with draft legislation expected in Quarter 1 2014. One area being considered is antibiotic resistance. Companies have been operating in an uncertain environment where they believe that if they did develop a new antibiotic, it would be unlikely to be authorised for use by regulators, or it would have such limitations put on its use that they would not receive a return on their investment.  This is a well-documented phenomenon that occurred in the human pharmaceutical environment 10 years ago.5.3 Another measure to create a more favourable environment for the development of new antibiotics or alternatives to antibiotics would be increased data protection, which would allow companies a longer time period to achieve a return on their investment before generic copies of their products could be made and a more efficient, harmonised European regulatory system for veterinary medicines.  This will have an additional benefit as once generic competition enters a market, prices usually fall and use tends to increase (this has been shown in both human and veterinary medicine). In addition there have been associations made with this phenomenon and increased resistance in human medicine. (4, 5) Greater regulatory certainty and data protection would also encourage companies to research and develop alternatives to antibiotics. 5.4 Regulatory bodies may wish to consider whether state support is required for new classes of antibiotics to be developed for the vet sector.  Similar arrangements are in place to encourage development of exotic notifiable disease vaccine banks where the vaccines may not be used, except for exceptional circumstances, yet the development is needed.  6.              What measures (including behavioural change) have been most effective in controlling the spread of resistant pathogens, and could such measures be used to control other pathogens?6.1 A measure that has been effective in controlling resistance is the continued promotion of responsible use of medicines in agriculture as is already carried out by the Responsible use of Medicines in Agriculture Alliance (RUMA) in the UK and the British Veterinary Association and its species sub-divisions. At EU level the European Platform the Responsible use of Medicines in Agriculture (EPRUMA) and at a global level, the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) all fulfil similar functions. NOAH fully supports and actively participates in this work.  6.2 Prevention of infectious disease through appropriate hygiene and bio-security, through the use of vaccines where available, by appropriate nutrition and housing of animals and by farmers using appropriate ‘buying in’ policies are all measures that can be used to reduce the need for antibiotics.6.3 Nevertheless, there will be occasions when in spite of the above measures, animals will become sick with bacterial infections and will need to be treated with antibiotics (and other medicines) in order to maintain animal welfare.  This is acknowledged by the Director General of the World Organisation of Animal Health (OIE), Bernard Vallat, who in an editorial in January 2010 stated;‘It should be remembered that the control of threats to the health and welfare of animals such as bacteria, viruses, parasites and other pathogens cannot be achieved without the judicious use of drugs, vaccines and other veterinary products that act upon the health of animals, regardless of whether they are farmed, used for recreational purposes or kept as companion animals.’(6)6.4 Guidelines are published by the veterinary profession on responsible and informed prescribing using diagnostic testing where appropriate.  6.5 In the medical sector, hospital and general public hygiene campaigns have been effective in reducing the spread of infectious disease with a subsequent reduction in the prescription of antibiotics. A further measure when considering food borne bacterial pathogens is the need for appropriate hygiene standards during the slaughter, processing and preparation of meat from animals (or milk from dairy animals).  The continued focus on educating food industry workers on compliance with this legislation and enforcement of breaches can reduce the spread of food borne pathogens, regardless of whether these pathogens are resistant or not. &#xa0;7.              What global coordination and action is required to fight antimicrobial resistance and is the UK contributing enough towards cross-border initiatives?7.1 In an increasingly connected world, any measures need to tackle global use. The probability that selection for resistance will occur where antimicrobial usage is highest and least controlled, coupled with unprecedented mobility of humans and food stuffs, means that the threats in Britain and Europe will often emanate from outside and be brought to the UK via people travelling or international food trade. Improvements in the controls on prescription only medicines in both the human and veterinary sectors in the developing world could help ensure greater control of antibiotic use. The development of medical infrastructure in some areas of the world is required which is a huge undertaking. 7.2 The World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) promotes the responsible use of antimicrobial agents in animals. It has developed standards for monitoring of quantities of antimicrobial agents used and antimicrobial resistance. The Codex Alimentarius Commission, established by FAO and WHO in 1963 develops harmonised international food standards and codes of practice to protect the health of the consumers and ensure fair practices in the food trade. The Transatlantic Task Force on Antimicrobial Resistance (TATFAR) was created and tasked with increasing the understanding of US and EU activities relating to antimicrobial issues, and promoting information exchange, and co-operation between the USA and the EU.  7.3 The UK regulatory agency for veterinary medicines, the Veterinary Medicines Directorate (VMD) is active at an EU level in the regulatory framework for all veterinary medicines, including antibiotics.  Unilateral and often divergent actions by individual Member States to take measures to address antibiotic usage on an individual Member State level are not positive developments and can have unintended consequences and adversely affect animal health and welfare(7,10). The veterinary medicines industry is a small sector that does not have the economies of scale that the human medical sector has. For this reason a harmonised approach across the EU to regulation is desired. The Veterinary Medicines Directorate are active in this work and it is hoped they will remain active to ensure continued appropriate regulation of veterinary medicines. 8.              What are the strengths and weaknesses of the Government’s 2013-2018 strategy for tackling antimicrobial resistance? What changes might be made to further strengthen the Government’s action plan?8.1 The aspects of the strategy pertaining to veterinary medicines are welcomed by NOAH.   NOAH would particularly draw the committee’s attention to the quote from the Department of Health 5 year strategy at Point 2.1, page 8; ‘Increasing scientific evidence suggests that the clinical issues with antimicrobial resistance that we face in human medicine are primarily the result of antibiotic use in people, rather than antibiotics in animals’.(8)8.2 This evidence was supported by a recent publication in ‘Science’ by Mather et al (2013) using an unprecedented national collection of isolates collected contemporaneously from humans and animals in Scotland and including a sample of internationally derived isolates. Contrary to current understanding they demonstrated that Salmonella and its resistance genes were largely maintained within animal and human populations separately and that there was limited transmission, in either direction. (9)&#xa0;8.3 NOAH, through our activity with the Responsible use of Medicines in Agriculture Alliance (RUMA) take the issue of antimicrobial resistance very seriously and are committed to working with all areas of the animal health sector, to address the threat that this represents. RUMA produces guidelines for vets and farmers to meet this need for on-going training.   To strengthen the government’s action plan, we believe that government needs to consider how it could provide more support, both expertise and financial, to help raise awareness of the responsible medicines usage advice that RUMA already is engaged in.8.4 The 5 year strategy recognises that the complex nature of the factors that cause and spread resistance have to be recognised and understood.  Development of the evidence base through research, and through strengthening systems for monitoring antibiotic use and trends in resistance, will help establish effective interventions.  8.5 The veterinary sector is different from the human sector, in that there is not one source of the majority of the required data i.e. the NHS. It is essential to gather additional data about the usage of antibiotics at an individual vet practice and farm level in an efficient, user friendly and low cost manner.  9. Other points for consideration:The following points were not raised in the terms of reference of the inquiry but NOAH believes the committee may need to consider them. 10. How are antimicrobials used in animals?  10.1 RUMA developed explanatory text detailing how antibiotics are used in animals. This followed the European Parliament debate on the preventive use of antibiotics and sought to counter the view that prophylactic use of antibiotics on farm should not be allowed (ref: EP resolution on the public health threat of AMR 27 October 2011).  A similar proposal was made during the House of Commons debate on antibiotic use on 9 January 2013.10.2 NOAH supports the view that  interventions by vets who prescribe medicines can prevent and control outbreaks of disease and considers that the RUMA definitions of antibiotic use in animals describes how antibiotics can be used responsibly in animals to cure, control and, in exceptional circumstances, prevent disease. 10.3 The essential control is that antibiotics are only prescribed under the control of a veterinary surgeon on the basis of epidemiological and clinical knowledge. Furthermore, antibiotics must not be used to compensate for poor hygiene or for inadequate husbandry conditions or where improvements in animal husbandry could reduce the need for antibiotic treatment.11. Should antibiotics critical for human treatment remain available for veterinary use? 11.1 The committee needs to be aware that the World Health Organisation (WHO) list of antibiotics critical for human treatment encompasses the majority of antibiotics used in animals. The use of newer, high priority critically important antibiotics in the veterinary sector is already  low which demonstrates that vets only use these products where they are really needed and where ‘older’ antibiotics will not be effective. NOAH believes that vets need to retain the full range of current licensed antibiotics in order to be able to treat the range of conditions that affect animals.  If they were not available then animal welfare would undoubtedly suffer. Furthermore, removal of some classes from the veterinary sector would place undue selective pressure on the remaining classes which could increase resistance to those classes. 11.2 While some organisations have called for bans on the use of human critically important antibiotics in animals, NOAH believes a ban could have harmful consequences for animal welfare. A report titled ‘ESBLs – A threat to human and animal health?’ published by the Joint Working Group of DARC and ARHAI on the VMD website in February 2012 stated the following; ‘Therefore, banning even some aspects of currently permitted veterinary antimicrobial use (such as a possible ban of certain currently authorised veterinary medicines as previously proposed by the Chief Medical Officer) may well cause increased animal suffering. ….Probably the most contentious aspect would be if UK or EU inspired control measures meant that a pet could no longer be successfully treated in the UK. An unintended consequence could be an increase in such animals being taken abroad for treatment with the products banned from veterinary use in the UK and the consequent risk of their acting as a vector for bringing back other resistant organisms on their return. Another veterinary specific outcome measure is that the majority of veterinary antimicrobials are prescribed for use in livestock. The vast majority of these animals are kept for commercial reasons. The implementation of UK (or EU)-only antimicrobial resistance control measures could put the economic viability of those keeping livestock at a disadvantage’. (9)The economic environment in which vets and farmers operate should be considered as described above. 12. Conclusion 12.1 NOAH is happy to provide any additional information required either by meeting the committee or by correspondence. November 2013&#xa0;References1. Page 27, Benchmarking the Competitiveness of the Global Animal Health Industry, 2011 Survey , a report by BioBridge Ltd, Cambridge, UK for IFAH and IFAH-Europe , published July 2012.2. A. de Jong, V. Thomas, U. Klein, H. Marion, H. Moyaert, S. Simjee, M. Vallé. Pan-European resistance monitoring programmes encompassing food-borne bacteria and target pathogens of food-producing and companion animals.  International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents 41 (2013) 403– 409.  http://ac.elscdn.com/S0924857912004372/dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2012.11.004 3.  'Antimicrobial Resistance in human and veterinary medicine – one medicine, one problem?', Tuesday 2 October 2012 at the Royal College of Physicians, London, organised by the RCVS, in partnership with the Royal College of Pathologists, Royal College of Physicians and in association with the Health Protection Agency. http://www.rcvs.org.uk/document-library/rcvs-response-antimicrobial-resistance-strategy-and-action-plan/4. Toutain et al, 2013. The consequences of generic marketing on antibiotic consumption and the spread of microbial resistance: the need for new antibiotics. J Vet Pharmacol Ther. 2013 May 29.5. Jensen et al, 2010. Effect of generics on price and consumption of ciprofloxacin in primary healthcare: the relationship to increasing resistance. J Antimicrob Chemother 2010 65: 1286–1291.6. 6. OIE Editorial, January 2010: ‘Veterinary medicinal products and vaccines: indispensable tools for any effective animal health and welfare policy’. http://www.oie.int/doc/ged/D7133.PDF 7. Alban et al, 2012. Possible impact of the “yellow card” antimicrobial scheme on meat inspection lesions in Danish finisher pigs. Prev Vet Med. 2013 Mar 1;108(4):334-41.8. Point 2.1, page 8 Department of Health UK 5 Year Antimicrobial Resistance Strategy 2013 to 2018. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-5-year-antimicrobial-resistance-strategy-2013-to-2018 9. Mather AE , Reid SWJ et al, (2013)Distinguishable epidemics of multidrug-resistant Salmonella Typhimurium DT104 in different hosts. Science 341, 1514-1517.10.Pages 68 and 69 of ‘ESBLs – A threat to human and animal health?’, a report by joint working group of the Advisory Committee on Antimicrobial Resistance and Healthcare Associated Infection  (ARHAI) and the Defra Antimicrobial Resistance Coordination (DARC) Group. http://www.vmd.defra.gov.uk/pdf/ESBL_report.pdf &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;