&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from the Joint Committee and Select Committee on Statutory Instruments (SCE0008)]]]a. how the Committees have responded to the best practice recommendations Owing to their particular remit, very few of the Liaison Committee’s best practice recommendations, which are aimed primarily at departmental select committees, are relevant to the JCSI or SCSI. The Committees do not undertake inquiries and neither has taken oral evidence in this parliament. &#xa0;Recommendations concerning reports are pertinent. In line with the recommendation that Committees aim to publish brief and accessible reports, JCSI and SCSI have continued their practice of publishing short and succinct weekly reports in a style appropriate to their main target audience, parliamentarians and legislative drafters. &#xa0;The Liaison Committee also recommended better follow-up by Committees of their reports and for Committees to draw attention to inadequate Government responses. The JCSI published a Special Report in May 2013, entitled Excluding the Inert from Secondary Legislation, as a means of reinforcing and drawing further attention to a recommendation made in a number of weekly reports about an unwelcome development in drafting practice. It has used the Special Report as a tool to engage Government Departments in further discussions about this practice.&#xa0;b. how the Committees have approached the revised core tasks approved by the House in January Task 5 (to assist the House in its consideration of bills and statutory instruments, including draft orders under the Public Bodies Act) and Task 9 (to produce timely reports to inform debate in the House, including Westminster Hall, or debating committees, and to examine petitions tabled) are relevant to the JCSI and SCSI. &#xa0;The Committees’ approach to these tasks is as prescribed in Standing Order 151. During 2012-13, the JCSI and SCSI considered 1,068 statutory instruments and drew the House’s special attention to 77 of them. Committee staff have ensured that relevant business papers in both Houses clearly identify which instruments have and have not been considered. There is an additional impetus for the Committees to undertake prompt consideration because the Lords Standing Order 72 states that no resolution of that House can be taken until the JCSI has reported.&#xa0;c. any obstacles encountered The Committees have not encountered any obstacles to adopting the limited aspects of the Liaison Committee’s report applicable to them. More generally, the Committees have experienced, and continue to experience, difficulties in achieving a quorum, owing to the fact that several Commons Members have expressed a wish to come off the Committee but replacements have not been found. It is hoped that the recent change in policy by the Committee of Selection will assist in resolving this matter. &#xa0;d. any examples of innovation or good practice for others to considerThe very specific nature of the Committees’ work unfortunately makes it difficult to offer examples of practice which would be useful to other Committees.&#xa0;23 October 2013&#xa0;