&#xa0;

[[[Written ]]]

[[[evidence submitted ]]]

[[[by Dr IM Gould, Consultant Microbiologist, Aberdeen Royal infirmary]]]

[[[ (AMR0023)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]Summary

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;There seems to have been a dramatic increase in resistance, especially in developing countries, but much of this is probably due to better ascertainment. Consumption, and thus resistance, does however seem to increase year on year, especially in developing countries where increased wealth allows more access to antibiotics and where infection control is often of a poor standard. There are many places where a crisis point has been reached, with untreatable infections eg, in intensive care units. Countries are exporting many of these resistance problems such as many of the carbapenemase enzymes. Also, bacteria are much better genetic engineers than man and the antibiotic era has driven rapid evolution of bacteria. With a certain threshold of use there is the possibility of accelerated bacterial evolution. We don’t, however, understand the real situation as there is a critical lack of surveillance of both resistance and antibiotic consumption in most parts of the world. Even in the UK and Europe, surveillance of antibiotic consumption  is poorly developed. There needs to be a global coordinated approach to monitor the situation. Routinely generated consumption and resistance data is available in computerised form in many countries but there is an almost complete failure to analyse it appropriately. There needs to be much improved statistical and mathematical modelling capability so that each hospital or health authority can analyse its own data by time series analysis with ARIMA modelling to accurately assess the effect of (often expensive) control measures. In developing countries there need to be many more quality assured microbiology laboratories to perform resistance testing and surveillance.&#xa0;&#xa0;Huge gaps exist on a surveillance level (as explained above) and also on an evolutionary level (cause and effect) eg, if we understood bacterial evolution at a patient level we could be much more clever about how we dose antibiotics. The push to oral switch is probably a bad move in terms of resistance selection and maintenance as the bowel flora are usually more exposed to antibiotic with oral therapy. The concept of prescribing thresholds needs studies to ascertain the levels of prescribing of each antibiotic class that trigger major resistance problems. More work needs to be done on which classes lead to most problems, eg quinolones are under the spotlight for generating proportionately more resistance than other classes. The benefits and drawbacks of antibiotic combinations also need more study.There can never be enough research as bacteria will always be ahead in evolutionary terms.  There has been a huge loss of expertise in traditional mechanisms of antibiotic discovery and new genomic screens have not proved useful. We must remember the extensive collaboration that was needed to produce industrial levels of penicillin during the war. Several major pharmaceutical firms were involved, along with the British and American governments, and patents were waived. …….and methods to ensure continued protection against infection?........New disinfectants and antiseptics will be important for the future. A lot of research shows the benefits of chlorhexidene bathing, but chlorhexidene resistance is emerging so we need alternatives. Behavioural change too is important here as medical staff are notoriously lax about infection control. Closure of hospital laboratories and loss of on site microbiologists will add to this problem. More and improved vaccines too, need to be developed and other new ways of preventing and fighting infection, such as adjuvants and virulence modifiers …………. If not, how could this be rectified?

[[[ ]]]Probably all the low hanging fruit have already been plucked and there is no guarentee that there are any major new classes of antibiotic awaiting dicovery. While to some extent we will have to be alert to the chance observation, as was Fleming, we need to recreate an era of cooperation for new discoveries. We also need a new relationship with Pharma in order to use antibiotics correctly, with constraint on marketing so they are not over-used. Probably we have to look for novel targets and concepts. Most of the known targets are common to most bacteria as they have evolved in quite restrictive ways, suggesting seeking such new targets will not be very easy. In addition, much better rapid diagnostics for resistant infections may allow improved antibiotic stewardship, eg MRSA admission screening has been shown not only to control spread of MRSA but to allow more rapid appropriate treatment with consequent improved outcomes.4.What measures (including behavioural change) have been most effective in controlling the spread of resistant pathogens, and could such measures be used to control other pathogens?Both educational and restrictive initiatives have published evidence to back them, but my own experience shows the dramatic effect that restriction enforced at the highest level can have eg with the Scottish 4Cs initiative. Such an intervention did more good in a few months than I have seen with many years of education. World-wide, we need to remove financial incentives to prescribe antibiotics at both an individual and instituitional level. Innovative ideas in health financing, social marketing and public-private ownership are needed.5.What global coordination and action is required to fight antimicrobial resistance and is the UK contributing enough towards cross-border initiatives?

[[[ ]]]We have made a good, if belated, start in the UK and Europe, but are only at the beginning of a never ending story. The huge worldwide industry in antibiotic production, especially generics, needs to be better controlled as does consumption, perhaps by a Kyoto style agreement (but with more buy-in). Poor quality control in production, non prescription access,( incl. through the internet) and counterfeits are other concerns. Free antibiotic prescriptions send the wrong message to the public, indeed there is an argument that antibiotics are too cheap and this encourages inappropriate use. As a non-renewable resource, we need to think again about access to both new and existing products. Paradoxically there are also shortages of older, but still very useful, antibiotics, often due to reliance on only one manufacturer. Even in the UK we have recently had supply shortages for penicillin, temocillin and co-trimoxazole amongst others. These shortages can compromise good antibiotic stewardship initiatives. In developing countries there are often major access problems. Environmental pollution from hospital, farm and manufacturing plant sewage is another huge and largely unresearched issue. Global coordination of a comprehensive international plan, with the visibility of those on HIV, malaria and TB, is needed. 6.What are the strengths and weaknesses of the Government’s 2013-2018 strategy for tackling antimicrobial resistance? What changes might be made to further strengthen the Government’s action plan?

[[[ ]]]In general this is an excellent document, all encompassing. I just have a couple of other issues; A) in the Conclusions 6.13 it is stated that we “cannot undo the harm already done”. Actually we have significant good quality evidence that resistance can be reversed in many situations, particularly hospitals where the problem can quickly be diluted out if the correct actions on infection control and antibiotic stewardship are taken. Recent examples in the UK are MRSA and C. difficile. B) the Risk Assessment doesn’t put enough emphasis on reducing antibiotic consumption, indeed it states this is not likely to happen, in human care, in any significant way. It is critical that we do reduce consumption and there seem to be many opportunities to do this. Audits in hospital and primary care consistently show around half of prescriptions to be unnecessary. We need to introduce targets for a decrease in overall consumption, and that of key agents, as in Sweden and Scotland. Doctors should be protected from litigation if they wrongly do not prescribe an antibiotic. They could also be sanctioned if they prescribe too many. Setting targets and publishing compliance may help. A recent initiative from Scandinavia (which is renowned for its good antibiotic stewardship) does not allow attendance at day care if the child is on antibiotics. Lastly, stewardship programs should have a higher profile as part of hospital accreditation programs, with increasing emphasis put on rapid diagnostic tests to guide prescribing. Finally, we must be careful of unintended consequences from our efforts. With the best intentions, some guidelines have been introduced which have led to large and inappropriate increases in antibiotic consumption as the guidelines were poorly implemented. There are many concerns too about conflicts of interest of guideline authors.Declaration of Interests – Dr Ian M Gould              GSK                                                        -              Consultancy/lecture fees              MSD                                                        -              Consultancy/lecture fees              AstraZeneca                                          -              Consultancy/Lecture fees              Becton Dickinson                            -              Consultancy              Astellas                                                         -              Consultancy              Novartis                                          -              Consultancy/lecture fees              Pfizer                                                        -              Consultancy/lecture fees              Biomerieux                                          -              Consultancy              The Medicines Company              -              Consultancy              Cepheid                                      -            Consultancy              Cubist                                          -           ConsultancyIn my capacity as President of the International Society of Chemotherapy, I am frequently requesting meeting support from a wide range of Diagnostic and Pharma companies, including many of those involved in the manufacture of diagnostics and antibiotics for MRSA.                                                                                                  November 2013              &#xa0;