&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from Staffordshire County Council (PEX 0031)]]]In terms of the inquiry, we welcome the opportunity to present our views and responses to the core themes the committee is considering. Staffordshire County Council has transformed how it works in order to become focused on outcomes, using innovation, insight and smarter use of resources and commissioning and procurement to meet future challenges in the public sector. Integration is a significant part of this agenda. This transformation is outlined in the council’s strategy entitled ‘Achieving Excellence’ which is a single vision to establish a “connected Staffordshire, where everyone has the opportunity to prosper, be healthy and happy”. This vision is matched by organisational values and behaviours, which are in turn expressed through three key outcomes:In meeting these outcomes, the council is committed to challenging organisational assumptions and boundaries. We believe we have to work much more closely with partners, residents and communities to ensure the £7.5billion spent by the public sector in Staffordshire each year is used to maximum effect. We believe that by emphasising partnerships and outcomes we can ensure that each public sector partner focuses on doing and delivering on what they do best, with the whole achieving more than the sum of the parts. Our vision involves looking at the fundamental role of the council and its partners in people’s lives now, and looking at how that role could develop in future years, when the impact of technology and societal change are considered. For Staffordshire County Council, our strategic strengths in developing an overview and insight of need within the county are matched by our ability to commission the best providers to deliver our outcomes. Our work has already been recognised with a commended in the MJ Awards 2013 in the Integrated Care category, and the County Council is also heavily involved in various national projects such as the Year of Care Early Implementer, a national Going Further Faster site for Personal Health Budgets, a CH Direct Payments in Care Homes Trailblazer site, and most recently . 

[[[Our response:]]]Broadly, we believe that the Nicholson Challenge represents a ‘make or break’ moment for the NHS to address the need to implement a much clearer approach to efficiency. We believe it is crucial that this is achieved to support the development of a more integrated system between health and social care. However, we believe that there is a need to look beyond efficiencies to the role in which a change in priorities from acute to early intervention and prevention would contribute to the development of savings. We believe that prevention and early intervention can manage need in a more proactive way than simply pushing for efficiencies, which although valuable do not address any strategic challenges. The health and social care system needs to shift its mindset from seeking to make the existing approach run more efficiently to instead designing a new system that delivers better outcomes at lower cost. For example, instead of spending significant amounts of money on treating obesity and its related conditions, we will move our investment to supporting people to eat a healthy diet from an early age and to be active in their daily lives.This relies upon strong local leadership and partnership working where we can better influence the spending across the entire system of health and wellbeing. This is about making every penny of our Public Health grant work efficiently and effectively as well as drawing on the wider Staffordshire public sector’s resource.But such a shift would need to reflect local priorities – as a ‘top-down’ national shift could undermine local strategic efforts and force another round of expensive transformations which local trusts and local councils cannot afford, in terms of both the cost involved and, perhaps more importantly, the distraction from addressing the challenges facing us all.  Instead, there is a need to recognise that the integration we need to achieve reflects what local people expect and assume. Whilst we do not have quantifiable evidence, there is little distinction between the ‘out-patient’ ward and the care home for those concerned about an elderly relative, or the expectation of the person paying for their own care. What is needed is a careful review of the law to ensure that whilst integration can be pursued, it isn’t undermined by expectations on either the NHS or Local Government which prevent them fully (but equally) engaging/investing in the process. The wider issue of funding presents a variety of philosophical concepts that would, theoretically, draw together separate streams of resource. For example it could be argued that one-off interventions (such as elective surgery) should be funded by the NHS, but all on-going care jointly funded (as the aim is to maintain people at the highest possible level of care). This in turn would make notions such as pooled budgets make sense at a local level, where the population is 300k-500k. However the logic of means testing for social care feels ever weaker, especially after the changes being brought in by the Care Bill. This would remove one of the major obstacles in the way of closer integration between health and social care.So the issue is less of drawing together a method of combining current funds but focusing on how the funding and performance management systems need to operate to ensure that services focused on the individual perform accordingly. The current problem as we see it is that everyone agrees in principle with the concept of integration, but lack a collective acceptance  of what that concept will look like in reality. Thus no one is fully aware of what they will lose or what demands will be placed on them from a shift towards integration, so the tendency is to expect the worst. When we completed the Integrated Pioneers bid it was really clear that as organisations across Staffordshire and Stoke we all were signed up to the principles of Integrated Care (person centred, seamless, co-ordinated care) but we hadn’t got a collective understanding of what that means for each partner’s services. At the heart of this is a need to ensure that Health &amp; Social Care funding, if brought together, needs to come via the Commissioners of Health &amp; Social Care, not the providers. The focus on providers undermines an integrated model and approach and would require organisations such as NHS England to wean themselves off temporary solutions to systemic problems such as ‘winter pressures’. Moreover if funding is brought together it will force organisations to work together that haven’t before, and it will push the integration agenda, meaning that we have to look at integrated ways to secure improved health and wellbeing outcomes. This would require a level of co-ordination and agreement that would far exceed the strategic capacity of organisations like the Health and Wellbeing Board, and additionally would present a quandary for previously powerful providers who would need to relinquish control. As organisations we each have our own priorities and each organisation has their own financial challenges. What we need to consider is all of this as one health and social care economy and then prioritise. We need to agree one Performance Framework for our Integration Agenda.&#xa0; This may mean we have a countywide approach with local implementation. The Integration Transformation Fund is introduced in 15/16 and there needs to be robust governance around the spending plans/commissioning intentions for this funding.SCC believes that the necessary funding shift required to ensure success with integration should move priorities as well as resources from acute services into the community, this means having smaller specialist acute services and much more local community provision offering choice for the individual.However, in terms of the wider impact of such a reprioritisation and the relationship of the individual to the state, we also need to consider the potential impact on primary care, General Practice and their role in terms of delivery of these integrated arrangements. What we cannot avoid is the need to align the delivery of primary care with our integrated approaches, but such an alignment would clearly present a challenge in terms of resources which primary care currently control and the need for a balance of total resources through the system. Furthermore is the impact of integrated arrangements on the provision and role of the voluntary and community sector. Currently we see the VCS as a means of reducing demand on statutory services but an integrated system needs to ensure fair access and treatment, but this can’t compromise the wider integration of services which need to remain focused on the individual. We fully recognise the difficulties and complexities associated with this issue. Nonetheless, we believe that the existing approach whereby theoretical allocations are calculated and then local areas are gradually moved towards them brings with it very significant disadvantages. On the one hand, areas that are well below their target may use this as an excuse not to address their financial challenges as robustly as they might. On the other hand, the slow pace of movement towards target allocations means that those areas above their target feel only limited urgency to make the additional savings and redesign required to prepare them for that reduction. Finally, the complexity of the formula and the potential for target allocations to change significantly depending on the relative weighting of different elements can result in local areas feeling as though the budget assigned to them has been determined almost randomly, which again undermines ownership of the figures and of the actions required to address financial pressures. Our local experience, through the Mid-Staffordshire Inquiry alongside the Berwick and Keogh reviews has demonstrated the need for a step change in how we can organize and support local health institutions. Staffordshire County Council has suggested that part of the solution is the reorganisation of services to align with local priorities – identified through both the CCGs and the local Health and Wellbeing Strategy. This is based on the recognition that the traditional model of a small District General Hospital as a freestanding independent organisation is no longer sustainable and that the system needs to shift towards a network model, covering a larger footprint, with services deployed locally or centrally dependent upon demand and viability. This does require that quality of care be put before choice of provider.Staffordshire County Council is concerned that the current pressures which the NHS are facing could undermine the wider need for strategic reform. In particular, the repackaging of resources to support transformation around the upcoming care bill, plus the £3.8bn set aside for integration could be at risk of these financial pressures meaning they are used to support existing budgets, rather than being used to facilitate transformation of care. The spending review has progressively pushed local authorities into a narrow focus on those individuals with the highest levels of need, and within that on reducing the unit cost of care packages. This has the potential to push in precisely the wrong direction, as it squeezes out preventative work with those on the cusp of care, thereby resulting in a vicious circle. The changes are pushing councils towards the classic model of an ambulance at the bottom of the cliff, rather than a fence at the top.In Staffordshire, our bold integration of adult social care services with community health services through the Staffordshire &amp; Stoke on Trent Partnership NHS Trust is designed precisely to address this challenge, by creating efficiencies through bringing services together that offer opportunities for a focus on prevention and early intervention.We recognize that local authorities have an impact on provision, but the task is as much to recognise the need for partnership and alignment to ensure that local priorities influence the plans rather than the unilateral decisions of local authorities. Within Staffordshire our strategic approach can be summarised by the Health &amp; Wellbeing Strategy ‘Living Well in Staffordshire’. Aligned with this is the County Councils ‘Achieving Excellence in Public Health’ which reflects the following priorities:A key part of this is the provision of more effective information and advice which will be provided so that people are clearer about where to go to access services, and be supported to make good choicesCitizens will be supported to stay safe from avoidable health problems, for example, through screening and vaccinationIt is clear that at a strategic level there is alignment on bringing together the approaches of both local council and the Health Economy, so within Staffordshire there is an obvious fit for integration approaches. But a wider consideration is the question of addressing the needs of the individual and ensuring the right services are centred accordingly. Within SCC this approach leads to a challenge of formal boundaries either challenging them directly or ignoring them entirely. Such a concept takes integration beyond a conceptual stage to a reality but the challenge remains how we can ensure that all partners focus on the individualOur own approach to integration can be highlighted by the development of the Stoke-on-Trent &amp; Staffordshire Partnership NHS Trust (see appendix A). Bringing together our social care and community health provision presents the early insight, experience and framework for the development of a wider integrated approach to health and social care. Broadly, there is a persistent expectation that health provision is free at the point of access. Whereas the Social Care system is means tested and is provided once a person is assessed and meets the eligibility criteria. Such a divided system being drawn together risks eroding these boundaries; either challenging the universal concept of health care or dramatically altering the current approach to social care as summarised in the Care Bill. Practically, free healthcare is dictated on the basis of current NICE guidelines and wider value for money judgements. A simplistic response would be to apply such a guidelines to social care, but the extent to which this would undermine the principles contained with the Care Bill and more widely the Dilnott recommendations would need to judge as well as the overall complexity and risk that social care as a function would be less about services delivered for the individual, and more about a massive expansion of the NHS.    Furthermore this would require a significant change in practice and time to embed the culture changes required to make this a reality.&#xa0; There would need to be robust workforce development plans, and considerations in terms of the skill mix of staff would need to be considered, as the role of professionals would potentially change too.&#xa0; We are already looking at joint risk management tools to identify at risk groups, and starting to embed a risk management approach.More widely, the Care Bill talks about ‘portability’ demonstrating that whilst integration remains intuitive and sensible it is complicated by the expectations placed on the local authority in terms of operational requirements. Therefore the issue is as much the commitment of NHS through its approach to efficiencies, but also its wider strategic remit, to ensure that the savings made support the on-going integration of services. &#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;Appendix A

[[[STOKE-ON-TRENT &amp; STAFFORDSHIRE PARTNERSHIP NHS TRUST: ]]]The ageing population in Staffordshire – growing faster in Staffordshire compared to the national average - presents a variety of unprecedented health and social care challenges. The arrangements in place, Staffordshire County Council (SCC) knew had to change to build resilience into the system now and for the future, and so the Stoke-on-Trent and Staffordshire Partnership Trust was created, spearheaded by Director for People, Eric Robinson. This is the largest body of its kind in the UK with around 5,500 staff and a budget of £355 million (SCC transferring £153m and 1100 staff to the Trust). Taking an innovative and proactive approach to working across the sector with health partners, joining social care and community health services, we are leading the country in meeting the government agenda, working in partnership to help our local people become healthier, happier and more supported in and by their community. Benefits&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;