&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from the Environmental Audit Committee (SCE0013)]]]&#xa0;The Liaison Committee has asked committees for information on their response to the Liaison Committee’s recommendations in its 2012 Select Committee Effectiveness report. The Environmental Audit Committee has agreed the following note.Action on the Liaison Committee’s recommendationsWe have continued our practice of annual “awaydays” (within the Parliamentary estate) to review our working methods and effectiveness. As we mentioned in our submission to the Liaison Committee last year, we used our 2011 awayday to set an aim for the Parliament of testing the extent to which the Government is, in the Prime Minister’s words, the “greenest government ever” within context of sustainable development. That sustainable development agenda has been an underlying theme of all of our work. We made a commitment in a report in May 2011 to continue to audit the Government’s performance under its new systems for embedding sustainable development across departments, focusing on the central oversight of Defra and the Cabinet Office, and in June 2013 we made another commitment to extend that scrutiny to look at sustainability in individual departments. With significant audit and briefing support from the NAO, we have examined the position in BIS [and will soon be examining the Home Office.] The BIS audit prompted that department to fill a vacant ‘sustainability champion’ post and we understand from the NAO and Defra that other departments, faced with NAO/EAC audits, are refining their sustainable development structures and processes. Our commitment to scrutinise sustainable development extended to the international stage, continuing our long-running examination of the UN Rio+20 Earth Summit. In our inquiry on the outcomes of the summit, we sought unsuccessfully to take oral evidence from the Deputy Prime Minister as the leader of the UK delegation at the Summit. He told us that he had given evidence on political and constitutional reform, for which he had special responsibility, and did not wish to set a precedent of giving evidence to committees on other areas. He agreed to meet us informally, accompanied by other ministers, but this proved difficult to arrange. Instead, we asked the Liaison Committee to take evidence from the Deputy Prime Minister, and that session took place in February 2013. That session inevitably covered a range of issues, which allowed only a brief examination of his role on Rio+20, but in the process we have opened up a vehicle for scrutinising the work of the DPM more directly. We used an external trainer at that 2011 awayday to review our performance in conducting oral evidence sessions and to advise on improvements, and she also facilitated an assessment of how we might conduct sessions more effectively and the clerks improve our briefs. We understand that, following her work for us, other committees have since also used her skills in this way. We reviewed our communications/press strategy in 2011, and have revisited that each awayday since. We immediately followed suit when the Liaison Committee began differentiating conclusions from recommendations in reports. We have also sought to produce fewer, more tightly focused recommendations: since our March 2012 submission our reports have averaged eleven recommendations, and since the Liaison Committee report less than nine. We have, since our March 2012 submission, tagged our reports and evidence six times: three times for debates in Westminster Hall and three times in the Chamber. Committee staff have examined the extent of the Government’s implementation of those of our recommendations that were accepted by Government in Session 2010-12 (we will soon extend that analysis to later sessions). This showed that for one report — on Air Quality — the Government has shown signs of going back on its acceptance of two recommendations, including the Government’s “absolutely clear ... opposition to a third runway at Heathrow”.The ‘core tasks’As we discussed in our March 2012 submission to the Liaison Committee, our departmentally cross-cutting remit to examine sustainable development makes many of the ‘core tasks’ difficult or inappropriate for us. We do not have a single department whose finances and administration we can scrutinise. Indeed, we have continued to examine the role of more than one department in nearly all of our inquiries. Our Green Economy inquiry, for example, covered four departments (Defra, BIS, DECC and Treasury) and Protecting the Arctic three departments (DECC, Transport and FCO), and in the course of our inquiries since April last year we have covered the work of eight departments. As before, however, we have continued to examine Government policies at an early stage when more readily amenable to change. Our reports on the Energy Intensive Industries Compensation Scheme and Sustainable Development Indicators, and ongoing inquiries on Biodiversity Offsetting and the Code for Sustainable Homes, all respond to Government consultation exercises. Innovative practicesWe hesitate to claim what might be termed ‘innovative practices’. We would highlight the following areas.We have endeavoured to take our work away from Westminster when appropriate, particularly when there has been a need to engage with a particular group of stakeholders. We held a seminar at St Martins-in-the-Field in May 2012 to discuss the international sustainability agenda ahead of the UN Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro the following month. Our seminar involved speakers from youth, business, environmental and faith groups as well as Mr Speaker, and took questions from the 500 members of the public present. We launched our ongoing Green Finance inquiry at another seminar at the Guildhall in the City of London, and we took formal oral evidence on that same inquiry at the new opened Headquarters of the Green Investment Bank in Edinburgh. We plan to hold a final public event at the City when we publish our report early next year. We have also continued our annual practice of meeting the finalists of the ‘Climate Week’ award scheme, to discuss their initiatives and ideas. We have continued to benefit greatly from significant assistance from the National Audit Office which is particularly important, as we mentioned before, because we no longer have support from the Sustainable Development Commission after it was wound up in 2011. The NAO provide a monthly bulletin detailing developments on sustainable development, environmental protection and energy matters. The NAO has produced, at our request, very helpful briefs for our inquiries on Carbon Budgets, Progress on Embedding Sustainable Development and Sustainability in BIS. It is also undertaking audits in individual departments on our behalf of their sustainability performance (see above). We have continued our practice of annual seminars with academics and researchers hosted by the British Academy and the Sustainability Knowledge Alliance. These have provided useful insights into issues before we have formulated precise terms of reference for some inquiries. We have also continued to undertake an annual visit to Brussels for briefings on up-coming European initiatives tied to ongoing or prospective inquiries. Our most recent visit in December 2012 allowed us to discuss evolving discussions in the European Commission on possible action on a particular type of agricultural pesticide, as part of our inquiry on Pollinators and Pesticides. This opened the way for us to travel to Brussels in April 2013 to discuss the proposed Commission ban on those ‘neonicitinoids’ with the Health &amp; Consumer Affairs Commissioner, who was able to take on board the findings of inquiry before that ban was finally approved. In that inquiry, as well as in our Protecting the Arctic inquiry, we also sent copies of our report to environment committees of other European (and in the latter case to those of the Arctic states). We also persuaded the FCO to arrange for our Protecting the Arctic report to be put on the agenda of a meeting of the Arctic Council.We have continued to make selective use of video-conferencing to take evidence. We have used this four times this Parliament, including taking formal oral evidence for our Arctic inquiry from Prof Richard Steiner in Alaska (9 hours behind!). 6 November 2013              &#xa0;&#xa0;