

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Written evidence submitted by]]]

[[[ Ricardo UK Ltd]]]

[[[ (GHS0016)]]]Ricardo is a leading independent provider of innovative technology, engineering services and strategic consulting to the world’s automotive, transport and energy industries.    Ricardo was the Project Coordinator for the European Commission project Safe Road Trains for the Environment (SARTRE).   This EU FP7 research project delivered a prototype vehicle platoon system using two heavy goods vehicles and three passenger cars, with one of the trucks leading the convoy.  Ricardo is also the leader of a consortium including TRL which won a recent Department for Transport tender on a Feasibility Study for Heavy Vehicle Platoons on UK Roads.  This feasibility study will also include a technology review and the development of a work specification for roads trials of HGV platooning on UK motorways.&#xa0;What are (or were) the policy challenges presented by this technology? Levels of automationThe term “autonomous vehicle” covers a wide range of automated vehicle technologies ranging from automated parking to a fully autonomous vehicle operating under all conditions and not requiring any (short-term) human intervention.  A number of organisations, BASt (Bundesanstalt für Straßenwesen) in Germany and NHTSA (National Highway Traffic Safety Adminstration) in the USA, have already started to classify these technologies and define the different levels of vehicle automation.&#xa0;Levels of automation need to be defined to create an agreed EU-wide set of definitions.  These definitions will help to frame all subsequent policies on automated vehicles.LiabilityAt present, liability rests with the (human) driver.  With an automated vehicle, liability could rest with the vehicle owner / keeper, the vehicle driver / operator, the manufacturer, the driver of another vehicle (e.g. in platooning system), etc.  Regulations to define the responsibilities of the different parties are required.LGV Driver’s HoursThe driving and working hours of commercial vehicle drivers is highly regulated.  If a LGV driver is part of an automated platoon, and is not required to actively control the vehicle, the regulations need to be updated to clarify how this time should be classified.  This could potentially extend the 4.5+4.5 hour daily limit and therefore increase the daily range of the vehicle.  At present, in the case of multi-manning where there are several drivers in the vehicle, the non-driving driver’s time is not considered as “driving” but is considered as either “rest” or “POA (Period Of Availability)”.The physical, legislative and interface requirements on how the platooning system should work with the tachograph need to be defined to enforce the safe and legal operation of the vehicles.  The operational aspects of platooning such as enforcement, effects on driver of leading a platoon, etc. need to be investigated.LegislationCurrent legislation is based on the 1968 Vienna Convention and the “driver shall at all times be able to control his vehicle”.  For automated vehicle technology to be introduced to the market, the legislation must be updated to cater for different levels of drivers being “in the loop”, recognising that different rules may apply for the range of levels of automation.In the first instance, the regulations to allow approved organisations to develop and test their prototype systems on public roads is required.  Although development and testing will start on private test tracks, tests in real-world environments on public roads is essential to develop mature, robust systems that are suitable for commercial introduction.At a later date, regulations for commercial introduction of such technologies are required.Overview of SARTRE project – “Safe Road Trains for the Environment”The SARTRE project is a European Union FP7 project which develops strategies and technologies to allow vehicle platoons to operate on normal public highways with significant environmental, safety and comfort benefits.  The basic assumptions are that SARTRE platoons will operate on public highways, shared with other non-platoon traffic, and that no changes to the road infrastructure will be required.The project was led by Ricardo and has brought together the skills and expertise of 7 partners from 4 countries: Applus+ IDIADA, Institut für Kraftfahrzeuge Aachen (ika), Ricardo, SP Technical Research Institute of Sweden, Tecnalia, Volvo Cars, Volvo Technology.The overall concept of SARTRE is to have a group of vehicles driving together with a lead vehicle, driven normally by a trained professional driver, and several following vehicles driven fully automatically by the system with small longitudinal gaps between them.  Driving in this way in a platoon brings benefits in fuel consumption, safety and driver convenience.  The demonstration system has been successfully tested on test tracks and public motorways, and demonstrated to industry stakeholders as well as members of the press.  Using these vehicles, the fuel consumption benefits of platooning have been measured, showing gains of up to 16% for the following vehicles and 8% for the lead vehicle.Although there remain technical and regulatory challenges before a commercial implementation of SARTRE can be available, the project has successfully demonstrated platooning technology based to a large extent on existing technologies which can be implemented on existing highways without any additions to the road infrastructure.November 2013&#xa0;