&#xa0;

[[[Written Evidence from David Rapp [PHS0039]]]]&#xa0;I have had a complaint with the office of the Parliamentary Ombudsman for several years.&#xa0;During this complaint the Ombudsman has repeatedly gotten basic facts wrong about my complaint. Has refused to look into key aspects of my complaint and has misinterpreted and misunderstood medical evidence.&#xa0;This has meant that the amount of compensation I have been offered for the impact of maladministration is entirely a derisory figure. This act, by the Ombudsman, has twice led to my being hospitalised due to mental health trauma. The only difference the Ombudsman has made to my life, has been to say that while the actions of Ofqual has caused me significant distress and made it more difficult for me to return to my work, Ofqual do not need to do anything to compensate me for this harm. As it stands due to the maladministration by Ofqual my life and career is ruined. The Ombudsman propose that £750 is appropriate. During my complaint I needed legal support, however the Ombudsman has refused to compensate me for the lawyers, in spite of the Ombudsman having contacted them, rather than me, to discuss my case. This means that my legal fees will entirely swallow up the amount of compensation. I feel that this is unfair. The Ombudsman points to advocacy groups who could have supported me. However at the start of the complaint the Ombudsman did not signpost these groups to me and in fact discouraged me from seeking them out by threatening legal consequences should I divulge any information relating to the complaint.&#xa0;I have been subjected to amateur psychological diagnosis by a member of the Ombudsmans staff. The Ombudsman commissioned an independent psychiatric evaluation of the evidence relating to my complaint by an expert witness, this was done without my knowledge, I have been denied access to knowing both who this expert is and what they said. I do not consider this fair. I feel that I have also been discriminated against because of my health issues during this complaint. Indeed the Ombudsman refused to release a data subject access request, until they had received Psychological approval. I found this added step to be very derogatory treatment. What was worse was that where the Ombudsman recognised that some evidence was contradictory, they arbitrarily decided which side of the contradiction was correct rather than contact the individual who had provided that testimony who would have cleared things up for them.&#xa0;During my complaint I asked for the Ombudsman to move it to a different investigator, because I felt that the current investigator had discriminated against me and did not understand the issues at stake. I made a complaint about her treatment. Her manager decided that rather than move the complaint, she should continue to work on it, so long as I was given the impression that she had been removed. This left me feeling very outraged. Not only had the Ombudsman ignored my complaint about the investigator but they had chosen to leave her in situ rather than address the issues between us.&#xa0;The Ombudsman has also refused to look into areas of my complaint which flowed from discoveries made during the complaint itself. I was misled by the organisation (Ofqual) initially as to what had gone on. However rather than evaluate every possible maladministrative act that has been uncovered. The Ombudsman has cast her net too narrowly. This means that potential avenues which could lead to service improvements are being ignored.&#xa0;Further the private nature of the Ombudsman, is I feel a relic of bygone times. The requirement not to discuss issues relating to a complaint is stifling and prevented me from seeking advocacy support due to a fear of legal repercussions. I believe that information about maladministration should routinely be published, so that any interested party can see precisely what was said and by whom.&#xa0;Further because my complaint involved failures by a private company and their regulator, I had to abandon legal action against the private individuals in order for the Ombudsman to complete their investigation. I felt that this was wrong. The Ombudsman should have some power to deal with private companies and individuals, because as public services increasingly become privatised the Ombudsman becomes more and more irrelevant. &#xa0;I have not felt satisfied with my complaint to the Ombudsman. I and those experts I asked to testify on my behalf have felt ignored. I have felt that my complaint is being treated as an academic game. I have felt that the Ombudsman does not have the powers to go far enough in some respects.  &#xa0;As it stands I have not received redress for my complaint. I am asked to hope that a review by the Ombudsman will be fair, and failing that I must take my chances with a judicial review.&#xa0;I certainly feel that the Ombudsman does not currently have the tools to make a difference and some of these are not specifically related to her powers, but to the procedures she uses. The Ombudsman should leave no stone unturned in an investigation and should be feared by failing governmental departments. At the moment she seems a toothless kitten.&#xa0;In regard to the questions posed by the committee. &#xa0;I can only give my opinion on some of these.&#xa0;11. I believe that the Parliamentary Ombudsman should have a body who are entirely independent of the Ombudsman, who can look into and review complaints about the Ombudsman service itself. This could be achieved through a judge led body or by a cross party Parliamentary committee.&#xa0;12. The Ombudsman today has her hands tied in part by the increasing privatisation of the public sector and by the role of the courts and lawyers. The Ombudsman does not and can not investigate all aspects of a complaint. She cannot pursue down every avenue of inquiry. This is frustrating for complainants who may not always be able to appreciate the differences between an Ombudsman and a more formal inquiry service. It seems, certainly based on my experiences that the Ombudsman has limitations.&#xa0;13. I am of two minds about this. For one the assistance of a good local MP cannot be understated. It is important that citizens making a complaint to the Ombudsman have some form of support. However whether this is or is not or should be the role of the MP is unclear. On the other hand, a poor local MP may create an unwanted barrier to justice. I would suggest that if the Ombudsman were to operate without the MP filter, then a body of advocates could be formed, who operating independently of the Ombudsman exist to help signpost a complainant through the process. &#xa0;I feel that these advocates could lead to a real service improvement. When a person complains to the Ombudsman they do not know what is going on or how to present their arguments. Support is needed to ensure that the complainant is properly heard and understood as a misunderstanding can lead to greater issues.&#xa0;&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;