&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Royal College of Physicians’ (AMR0053)]]]&#xa0;The Royal College of Physicians (RCP) plays a leading role in the delivery of high quality patient care by setting standards of medical practice and promoting clinical excellence.  We provide physicians in the United Kingdom and overseas with education, training and support throughout their careers.  As an independent body representing almost 29,000 fellows and members worldwide, we advise and work with government, the public, patients and other professions to improve health and healthcare. Our primary interest is in building a health system that delivers high quality care for patients. &#xa0;The RCP welcomes the opportunity to submit written evidence to the House of Commons Science and Technology Committee - Inquiry into Antimicrobial resistance (AMR). We would like to make the following comments. &#xa0;1. How has antimicrobial resistance developed in the past decade?&#xa0;Recognition of new resistant bacteria have been well developed since the discovery of antimicrobials. Bacteria will continue to evolve resistance when applied with the selective pressure of drugs that are trying to kill them. &#xa0;Over the last decade, we have seen substantial declines in the number of patients infected with MRSA with less hospital transmissions and a 10 fold decrease in MRSA bacteraemias. However, there have been increasing numbers of infections caused by multidrug resistant gram negative bacteria including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Pseuodomonas aeruginosa. Extended spectrum beta-lactamase producing Enterobacteriacae were almost non-existent 10 years ago but now in certain parts of the UK, up to 10% of the community population can carry these resistant spreadable plasmids.We are currently seeing increased cephalosporin resistance in Gonorrhoea, and a slightly reduced resistance to quinolones in this bacteria, related to the antibiotics prescribed for this condition. Equally in gram negative bacteria, reductions in the use of cephalosporins and quinolones have stabilised resistance in Enterobacteriacae to these drugs but increases in the use of other agents  in the last 5 years (penicillin/ enzyme inhibitors and carbapenems) corresponds with a rise in resistance to piperacillin-tazobactam and carbapenems.&#xa0;2. What are the gaps in our knowledge about antimicrobial resistance?&#xa0;We do not understand the cross species (animals to humans and inverse) transfer of antibiotic plasmids (mobile genetic elements) transfer between human and animal bacterial species.&#xa0;We do not understand the reasons or the ecological effect described above and how the impact of antibiotics prescribed can result in resistance at a population level.&#xa0;We do not understand how and what aspects of antimicrobial stewardship will impact on antimicrobial resistance. &#xa0;3. Is there sufficient research and investment into new antibiotics or other treatments and methods to ensure continued protection against infection? If not, how could this be rectified?&#xa0;No. We need increased investment of research councils alongside drug companies to promote investment in antimicrobials. We need to have clear national and international protocols for the advancement of new drugs through the pipeline and positive encouragement of drug companies, in a similar way that 'orphan' drugs have been developed. We need to ensure that drug companies have a clear benefit on developing new drugs but equally importantly how we can then put new drugs on the 'shelf' until they are required, rather than the drugs being given medical authorisation for the use of more common conditions in order to recoup the costs.&#xa0;We need to improve and have better diagnostics - both point of care tests that will stop antibiotic prescribing; or rapid diagnostics where antibiotics could be stopped within 2 days.&#xa0;We need behavioural change studies to demonstrate that stopping antibiotics if no bacterial infection found is both safe and acceptable. We also need studies looking at engagement with the general public and increased awareness strategies, not just looking at stopping the prescribers but reducing the need for patients to have antibiotics and both acceptability and feasibility of these strategies.  &#xa0;4. What measures (including behavioural change) have been most effective in controlling the spread of resistant pathogens, and could such measures be used to control other pathogens?&#xa0;Reduced rates of MRSA transmission occurred in many countries after the implementation of aggressive and sustained infection control interventions. These were active screening and contact isolation, pre-emptive use of isolation upon admission until proven culture negative and, in some instances, closure of units to new admissions once a clinical case is documented.  This has also been effective in other gram positive resistant infections and environmental gram negatives (Pseudomonas aeuginosa and Acinetobacter spp).&#xa0;Hand hygiene and isolation (both barrier and side-rooms) are essential at controlling of multi-drug resistant organisms (MDRO) and many studies confirm this point. However, this is predominantly important in healthcare settings.&#xa0;Environment can also be implicated in transmissions so increased cleaning of the environment, special precautions for waters and taps, hydrogen peroxide are all important both for the organisms previously described and may also be for other Enterobacteriacae (or gut pathogens) within a healthcare environment.&#xa0;Increasingly antimicrobial use is implicated in gram negative MDRO. However altering or changing the antibiotics used may have the effect of "squeezing the balloon as described above.&#xa0;Nearly all studies reporting successful MDRO control employ a median of 7 to 8 different interventions concurrently or sequentially. &#xa0;There is currently very little data on how to reduce multi-drug resistant gram negative infections outside hospital setting. Importantly there is no evidence on how to reduce MDR gram negatives in care homes or long-term care facilities or how to reduce transmission or spread in the community. If carbapenem resistance spreads as ESBL resistance already has then it is likely that approximately 1-5% of the population in the UK will carry MDRO bacteria in their gut within the next decade, leaving this population at risk of infections with minimal or no antibiotics to treat them.&#xa0;&#xa0;5. What global coordination and action is required to fight antimicrobial resistance and is the UK contributing enough towards cross-border initiatives?&#xa0;Clearly the global component of the strategy is extremely important. Previous meetings have concluded that antimicrobial resistance is likely to occur where antimicrobial usage is highest. In many developing countries standard public health measures such as sanitation, with clean water supply and removal of sewage are essential. In addition, the control of over the counter antibiotics is essential and prudent antimicrobial prescribing must be considered as essential not only for UK professionals but promoted worldwide in collaboration with WHO and other agencies. The Royal College of Physicians could play a key role in the spread of this given our large international fellow and member populations and existing international networks.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;6. What are the strengths and weaknesses of the Government’s 2013-2018 strategy for tackling antimicrobial resistance? What changes might be made to further strengthen the Government’s action plan?&#xa0;While the strategy initiates a call for action; little content of these actions is detailed. For example the UK will lead the development of an AMR resolution at World Health Assembly but little is included on the content of such as resolution.&#xa0;Equally, while it states that it will facilitate the development of new antibiotics there are no details on how this could happen and what policies might be initiated.&#xa0;The strategy does not explicitly state the impact of public health in the developing world, where the key role of sewage in the spread of multi-drug resistant organisms has been well reported.&#xa0;Clearly, the education of healthcare and veterinary professionals is essential to deliver this strategy. This needs to take place at both undergraduate and postgraduate level. Actual requirements in the syllabus need to be laid out and the newly formed Health Education England needs to be responsible and lead on this area, rather than the ‘have a role in helping strengthen curricula on antimicrobial resistance, responsible prescribing, infection prevention and control’. Clearly, the national antimicrobial prescribing competencies produced by PHE and ARHAI have a key role in shaping these curricula but currently nobody has the direct responsibility.&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;