&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Mr Gary Powell]]]

[[[Further submission to the CLG Commit]]]

[[[t]]]

[[[ee in respect of its inquiry into the work of the Local Government Ombudsman.]]]This submission is a response to the following request from the Clerk of the Communities and Local Government Committee, received on 6 November 2013:“Thank you for your submission in response to the Committee’s further inquiry into the work of the Local Government Ombudsman.&#xa0; The Committee has considered it and have asked me to write to you.&#xa0; You make a number of assertions about the External Review of the LGO carried out last year by Richard Thomas CBE, Jim Martin and Dr Kirkham of Sheffield University, specifically that it lacked independence and objectivity and was an “adulatory whitewash”. Furthermore, you make allegations that the process was dominated by Dr Kirkham, whom you describe as a “propagandist” for the LGO. These are serious allegations which from the contents of your submission and from the 2005 article you cite do not appear to be supported by detailed evidence. Before deciding what action to take in respect of your submission, the Committee would be grateful for a further submission setting out in detail your evidence to substantiate these contentions.”The fact that the Committee has written to me stating that they believe my accusations of an External Review whitewash and of Dr Kirkham being a pro-LGO propagandist “do not appear to be supported by detailed evidence” in my submission, is a matter of some surprise: both to me, and to my successor as Director of Local Government Ombudsman Watch. In both 2005 and 2012, both the current Director and I sent the CLG Committee, and its predecessor, submissions in which we accused the LGO of being a biased and dishonest organisation that deliberately deceived the public and manipulated statistics. Neither the current Director nor I received any request from the Committee in response to those submissions claiming that our assertions were not “supported by detailed evidence” and requesting further submissions setting out in detail further evidence to substantiate our contentions. The contentions we made in the 2005 and 2012 submissions about LGO bias, dishonesty and general maladministration were surely no less “serious allegations” than my accusation that the External Review has been an “adulatory whitewash” and that Dr Kirkham is a “propagandist” for the LGO, yet, as I have said, I was not asked for any further submission to set out in detail my allegations then. I therefore wonder what is so different in this case. Perhaps it was the case that the Committee felt that the allegations I made in my 2005 and 2012 submissions were already well substantiated by the evidence I had provided. However, if this is the case, then one must ask why the Committee did not take the accusations seriously and has all but ignored the evidence provided by LGO Watch over the course of almost a decade: in particular, evidence of the manipulation by the LGO of the Ipsos-MORI Customer Satisfaction Survey data, and the fact that the survey results were still damning of the LGO even after the manipulation had taken place. The submission I have recently submitted is the first one in which I have expressed criticism of the Committee itself; and I remain convinced that the Committee shares responsibility for the way the LGO has been allowed to betray the good citizens of this country with impunity, supported by taxpayer funding. The Committee remains the only institution that could properly call the LGO to account, and its inaction and unwillingness to treat with proper respect and seriousness the compelling evidence presented to it by concerned citizens struggling to make their discoveries and experiences heard, has been lamentable. It is not the job of private citizens to do the work of the CLG Committee: the core members of LGO Watch have already spent a colossal amount of time and energy on gathering evidence and on trying to encourage politicians to listen to it and penetrate the carapace of political indifference and collusion; and we do not have a fraction of the time or resources available to either the LGO or the Committee.In my previous submission, there is sufficient prima facie evidence that the External Review was a whitewash and that Dr Kirkham’s enthusiasm for the LGO, and his damage-limitation intervention following the aborted 2005 evidence session, marked him out as an individual whose colours as a sympathiser with the LGO as it currently exists, were firmly nailed to the mast, and who was therefore a totally inappropriate person to have been selected to carry out an independent External Review of the LGO. The Committee is in a position to investigate the quality and extent of Dr Kirkham’s historical relationship with the LGO, and whether he was likely to approach the Review from a neutral and objective perspective. All I can do is point to the evidence in his 2005 publication – including both what he said, and what he did not say - and just as importantly, point to the context of his publication. If the Committee is minded to ignore prima facie evidence provided by a private citizen who does not share its extensive resources to investigate, then there is little more I can do. A Committee that is genuinely concerned that an external review of the LGO be truly independent should surely be at least a little concerned that the very individual whose contributions clearly dominated the Review ["Richard Kirkham undertook the bulk of the research and drafting of this Report for which his colleagues are most grateful." (p4)] is the only non-LGO employee on the LGO Watch website with his own page:

[[[http://ombudsmanwatchers.org.uk/articles/friends_of_the_lgo.html]]]

[[[ ]]]Dr Kirkham’s page is entitled, “Friends of the LGO: Dr Richard Kirkham,” and it was set up in 2009, therefore long before he was commissioned by the LGO to conduct the External Review. Not only this, but I have discovered there is also a whole page on the Local Government Ombudsman Discussion Forum (no connection with LGO Watch) http://www.amv3.com/forum/index.php dedicated to Dr Kirkham, with posts dating from 2007, (searchable under “Kirkham”). This is clear evidence that Dr Kirkham has been considered for several years by LGO Watch supporters and other critics of the LGO to be a pro-LGO propagandist who, for reasons best known to himself, chooses to disregard and dismiss evidence of LGO bias presented by real complainants, and to present the LGO to the public, as an apparently impartial academic, in a way that does an injustice both to the facts readily at his disposal, and to the potential to gather facts from real complainants. He has been regarded as a pro-LGO propagandist by LGO Watch activists since he came to our attention in 2005 on the publication of his article, “A Complainant's View of the Local Government Ombudsman,”

[[[ ]]]published in the “Journal of Social Welfare and Family Law,” Volume 27, Issue 3-4, pp. 383-394, in December 2005.Dr Kirkham’s article was published subsequent to the ODPM Committee Evidence Session where, for the first time in the history of the LGO, the institution was facing questions as to its impartiality, honesty and efficacy. LGO Watch had been set up in 2003, and we provided detailed evidence to the Committee of how complainants to the LGO were being treated unfairly, and of how the LGO was manipulating its Customer Satisfaction Surveys, whose results were still nonetheless quite damning of the LGO, even after they had been manipulated. On the morning of the Select Committee evidence session on 15 March 2005, Jad Adams’s “Thunderer” column was published in the Times, criticising the LGO http://thetim.es/RfRqGd. The LGO hit back with a PR campaign, and on 26 April 2005, a sympathetic interview with the Ombudsman was published in the Times http://thetim.es/Re3Xya. Then came Dr Kirkham’s article in December, which to the astonishment of LGO Watch, bore the title, “A Complainant’s View of the Local Government Ombudsman.” We were astonished because Dr Kirkham gave absolutely no indication in his article that he had ever been a complainant to the LGO, and absolutely no indication that he had even spoken to any complainants to the LGO in order to find out their perspective. The title of his article bore the clear hallmarks of belonging to the LGO’s 2005 damage limitation exercise: it was complainants who had provided the evidence to the Committee of LGO maladministration and dishonesty, and now Dr Kirkham had published a sympathetic article on the LGO in which he claimed to represent the perspective of complainants, when in fact he was not one, when he casually dismissed the evidence provided by real complainants to the Committee, and when he did not make any effort to contact any real complainants at LGO Watch to ask for our perspective for the purposes of researching his article. His contribution was one that clearly fell far below acceptable standards of academic objectivity. Not only that, but where in his article Dr Kirkham did refer to evidence that we as complainants had provided to the Committee, that was published in the ODPM Committee’s report, he did so selectively, completely ignoring the detailed analysis of and commentary on the MORI Customer Satisfaction Survey that we had provided to the Committee. Surely any academic claiming to write an objective article from the perspective of a complainant should have taken a close interest in the very instrument that had provided evidence of complainants’ views: the MORI Customer Satisfaction Survey, and the analysis of it provided in the LGO Watch submission. Instead, this is glossed over, and Dr Kirkham dismisses the accusations made by real complainants to the Committee by making various unfounded blanket assumptions about them in time-honoured straw man paradigm fashion, which I shall explore below. In Dr Kirkham’s 2005 article, he makes reference to the evidence from dissatisfied complainants published by the ODPM Committee following the 2005 Evidence Session on the Role and Effectiveness of the LGO. He is clearly aware of the evidence presented by LGO Watch and our supporters of LGO bias and maladministration, and refers to my submission in his article, so it is a reasonable assumption that he read it. It was a requirement that those submitting evidence to the Committee did not focus on the content and detail of their individual complaints, and that they instead presented a wider, more general picture of systemic and procedural concerns. Several LGO Watch supporters had their submissions rejected because they did not meet this requirement. The LGO Watch submission was focused on evidence that the LGO was biased in favour of local authorities, and that its MORI Customer Satisfaction Survey indicated an alarmingly high rate of customer dissatisfaction with the LGO’s service that was even shared by 50% of those whose complaints were successfully upheld by the LGO. The LGO Watch submission also focused on strong evidence that the LGO had manipulated the process of the Survey, whose outcome would have been even more damning of the LGO if this manipulation had not taken place. Dr Kirkham decided to make no reference to this crucial evidence in the LGO Watch submission, despite there being a strong case to answer. Not only this, but in his 2005 article, he says:“There has never been any serious allegation that the LGO act in any other way but according to the highest standards of public conduct.” (ibid., p 388).This is surely an extraordinary thing to say. In this one sentence, Dr Kirkham dismisses the detailed evidence provided to the Committee of LGO bad practice as not being “serious”. So not only does he not bother to hear the views of real complainants – intelligent private citizens who had gone to great lengths to provide objective evidence, and who, unlike Dr Kirkham, were real complainants to the LGO – but he also chooses to dismiss our experience and our evidence out of hand in this cavalier manner as not being worthy of serious consideration. Furthermore, Dr Kirkham’s pivotal role in the research and drafting of the External Review should be considered very carefully in the light of this statement. He was supposed to be an independent Reviewer, looking into serious claims of systemic maladministration, bad practice and pro-council bias at the LGO. The work and evidence of LGO Watch, published after both the 2005 and the 2012 inquiries, has been instrumental in bringing about a more critical attitude towards the LGO on the part of the public and the Committee; and indeed, the evidence and material provided in the LGO Watch submission to the 2005 inquiry formed the basis of several of the questions asked during the evidence session. The evidence provided by LGO Watch – both via myself and the current Director – has not changed since 2005, albeit that new evidence has been added. This evidence was clearly rejected out-of-hand by Dr Kirkham before his started his External Review, as is so apparent from the above quotation from his 2005 article. In fact, it is astonishing that anyone who has publicly stated “There has never been any serious allegation that the LGO act in any other way but according to the highest standards of public conduct” should in any way be regarded as non-partisan enough to be charged with the task of conducting an independent External Review of the LGO. It is clear from this quotation alone that he was very sympathetically inclined towards the LGO long before he was appointed as an External Reviewer. At the beginning of his article, Dr Kirkham refers to the 2005 submissions to the ODMP Committee, and says, “In amongst these submissions, there were even proposals for the abolition of the LGO [...] To a certain extent, such criticisms misunderstand the purpose of public sector redress mechanisms and the remit of the Ombudsmen.” This is the standard straw man argument. I was the only person calling for the abolition of the LGO as an alternative to radical reform in the 2005 ODPM Committee Report on the LGO. I was not, and am not, someone who misunderstands the purpose of public sector redress mechanisms or the remit of the Ombudsman. When I was Director of LGO Watch, I told many people who contacted me, and I told them time and time again, that the LGO could only investigate complaints that fell within his jurisdiction, and that even then, he could only investigate complaints where there was prima facie evidence of maladministration combined with evidence that not only had injustice been suffered, but significant injustice. I was also fully aware that there was the restriction of time limits, of the local authority complaints procedure having to have been exhausted, and of the necessity of no parallel legal action taking place in order for a complaint to be considered by the LGO. There were some complainants who found these facts difficult to accept, or difficult to grasp, but I was certainly not one of them, and neither was the current LGO Watch Director. Nowhere in my submissions or campaigning have I ever expected the LGO to act outside his legal jurisdiction, or relax his criterion of requiring prima facie evidence of maladministration with significant injustice. In fact, these are criteria and restrictions that I fully support, not least for pragmatic reasons. When I was Director of LGO Watch, I was infinitely more concerned about grave injustices that affected very vulnerable people and their families, that could actually have brought about the loss of their lives or their mental health, than about any other issues that complainants were taking to the LGO; and these were the people I could not bear to sit back and see the LGO betraying. Dr Kirkham was clearly referring in the above quotation to my own submission, as he makes reference to “EV 26” after making his point. Yet nowhere in my submission is there the slightest shred of evidence that I “[misunderstood] the purpose of public sector redress mechanisms or the remit of the Ombudsman.” In fact, I gave very clear and detailed evidence that this was not the case. Dr Kirkham’s approach was to refer to my statement about LGO abolition, and then to create a straw man to attack, dismissing views that are very far from my own, and not giving me the courtesy of honouring and giving proper expression in his article to the real reason why I was suggesting abolition. This is surely not the kind of attitude that inspires confidence in him as an independent and objective Reviewer of the LGO.On page 384, Dr Kirkham’s article continues with an exploration of the LGO’s need to make the public aware of the LGO service. As he believes that the LGO behaves with such a high degree of probity, and dismisses the counterevidence as not being “serious”, he clearly does not appreciate the irony of how counterproductive it is to encourage more people to use a service that is systemically biased against them. On page 386, Dr Kirkham explores the limitations of the LGO’s remit, including the point that the LGO is not allowed to look at the merits of a decision of a local authority taken “in the exercise of a discretion vested in that authority.” This again has always been something of which I and other senior members of LGO Watch have been very much aware, and that we have never wanted to contest. Yet instead of exploring what our arguments actually were, and what merits those arguments might have, Dr Kirkham again decides to produce another straw man to attack:“Judging from many of the consumer complaints made to the Select Committee on the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, the failure of the LGO to review the merits of a local authority decision probably lies at the heart of much of the dissatisfaction that some members of the public experience with the LGO.”The irrelevance continues on page 386, where Dr Kirkham writes about the disappointment of those whose complaints are not investigated by the LGO because they fall outside his jurisdiction, or for other reasons to which I have referred above. What he presents as complainants’ objections bear no relevance to the arguments made by the current and previous Directors of LGO Watch in our 2005 and 2012 submissions: arguments that Dr Kirkham ignores in favour of attacking arguments we did not and would not make. On page 387, Dr Kirkham writes about how important it is for the LGO to maintain an “aura of independence”, and goes on to consider the option of judicial review.On page 388 Dr Kirkham states that “[...] the public should be entitled to expect the highest standards of conduct and impartiality from the Ombudsman. Hence, it is a worry that in some quarters there is a perception that the LGO is too familiar with local authorities (Select Committee on the ODPM, 2004-2005, Ev 16-28). This perception has mostly been derived from the fact that two out of three present LGOs were Chief Executives of local authorities before moving to their present post (Local Government Ombudsman, 2005).” But Dr Kirkham’s assertion is flawed, and posits a cause that is in fact an effect. It was LGO Watch that claimed the Ombudsmen were too close to local authorities, but we did not derive this perception from the fact that the Ombudsmen were ex-council CEOs. We derived the perception that the Ombudsmen were too close to local authorities from the fact that we had observed so much pro-council bias, not only in our own personal experience of complaining to them, but also in the evidence available in their annual reports, in the detail relating to their published Customer Satisfaction Surveys, and in the ongoing dishonesty and subterfuge we witnessed from their office as we conducted the ongoing LGO Watch campaign. This was what caused the perception that the Ombudsmen were biased in favour of local authorities. The fact that, in 2005, two of the Ombudsmen were ex-local authority CEOs merely provided a reasonable explanation as to why we were seeing such pro-council bias. If Dr Kirkham had bothered to speak to us, we would have been very happy to explain this to him. On page 389, Dr Kirkham writes about “silencing” critics of the LGO: “Improving the openness and transparency of the work of the LGO through regular public scrutiny would probably go a long way towards silencing critics of the post.” It is perhaps revealing that Dr Kirkham has chosen to use the phrase “silencing critics” here, instead of an alternative such as “reassuring critics”. For an articulate writer who chooses his words so carefully in the rest of his article, his clear wish to “silence” critics of the LGO rather than to satisfy and reassure us, inadvertently reveals his priority and his solidarity with the priorities of the then beleaguered LGO. Suggesting we should be “silenced” certainly does nothing to reassure me as to his impartiality when, for the first time in its history, thanks to the Internet, the critics of the LGO had found a forum and a voice to challenge its institutional injustice. A voice Dr Kirkham wanted to “silence”.On page 390, he writes about delays during LGO investigations:“Such delays have even opened up the LGO to allegations of maladministration!” “The ombudsman's 2011 Strategic Review, which it avoided publishing, suggested the bottom 20% of performers among the team handled some 10% cases. Some corporate functions within the ombudsman boasted staffing levels that were difficult to justify and that a significant proportion of operational support existed only to provide basic administrative and office services.We heard of cases sitting in the commissioner's office for 12 months. A body responsible for examining maladministration was now being accused of maladministration because of its lethargic and cumbersome approach. The ombudsman's response wasn't encouraging. It was sketchy about plans for transformation and appeared to learn little from good practice in Scotland and Ireland.There is no doubt the ombudsman needs to dramatically improve, and though it must retain its independence the Department for Communities and Local Government and parliament itself must push for that change.”On page 391, Dr Kirkham writes about the merits of local settlements, but omits to explore the effect on complainants of having a “local settlement” effectively imposed on them by the LGO should a local authority agree to it, but the complainant regard the remedy as inadequate: something that actually violates the definition of the word “settlement”, which normally implies agreement – perhaps with some compromise - by both or all parties concerned. Of course, in the case of complainants, the alternative to rejecting a “local settlement” proposed by the LGO is to have the investigation terminated and to get nothing at all. For somebody who purports to be representing “A Complainant’s View” in his article, Dr Kirkham certainly doesn’t give the genuine and legitimate concerns of real complainants much of a look-in. Instead, the straw men complaints predominate, which are far easier to defend against.Dr Kirkham makes another controversial statement on page 392:“[...] the LGO are there to perform a number of roles and, of those roles, publicly calling local authorities to account is one of the least important.” I am not convinced that the taxpayers who fund the LGO would have much sympathy for Dr Kirkham’s position on this matter. Surely one of the greatest checks and balances on the behaviour of a public authority, or of any person in public life, is the possibility of being publicly called to account. This is surely the essence of “accountability”. Admittedly, the priority of the LGO should be to provide a remedy for a complainant who has suffered maladministration with significant injustice and harm at the hands of his local authority. But to suggest that calling local authorities to account for maladministration should be “one of the least important roles” of the LGO is far too close for comfort to a justification of what so many complainants have perceived to be one of the greatest concerns of the LGO: to prevent the public becoming aware of the extent and seriousness of maladministration committed by his colleagues in local authorities.For the reasons I have set out above, I stand by my assertion that Dr Kirkham, who makes his living by writing about Ombudsmen, and who I do not believe the LGO would have selected for the Review team if they had not been confident of his affinity, is a propagandist for the Local Government Ombudsman, and that the so-called External Review is a whitewash. This is a long submission, and for reasons of time, I have concentrated on Dr Kirkham’s 2005 article rather than on the External Review Report itself. I would expect a conscientious Committee to regard the detail that I have provided above as at the very least prima facie evidence of bias on the part of this particular External Reviewer, and to initiate its own investigation as a result. An unpaid private citizen with a full-time job and family commitments should not be expected to do the job of the CLG Committee. On those occasions in the past when I have submitted evidence to the Committee and its predecessor of systemic LGO maladministration, it has received lip-service at best, and I am not at all confident that anything will change now in that respect.The point must be made that inviting the LGO to commission its own “independent” External Review, especially as one of the issues under investigation was to be the LGO’s fairness, objectivity and probity, does not inspire confidence that the Committee was serious about a genuine independent External Review taking place. I can see no reason why the CLG Committee should not have appointed its own team of Reviewers. The same applies to the Customer Satisfaction Survey that the LGO is expected to commission for itself. On the basis of how previous surveys of this kind have been manipulated by the LGO, detailed in my 2005 and 2012 submissions, the fact that the LGO could yet again have the opportunity to produce a more favourable outcome than it merits, is something that could easily have been avoided if the CLG Committee itself had commissioned the survey and ensured the LGO had no opportunity to influence it unfairly.  Examples abound of LGO dishonesty with regard to surveys about them. There is even one very recent example that I discovered while reading through the LGO’s recent Response to the Staff Satisfaction Survey, which I compared to the actual Report on the results of that Survey that had been circulated internally at the LGO, and leaked to LGO Watch by a member of LGO staff. In amongst the damage limitation attempt that was the LGO’s response to the damning Survey outcome, the LGO stated: “39% believe we provide a great service to our customers but 34% are undecided.” There was no mention of any staff member disagreeing with the statement that they provided a “great service” to their customers.This surely gives the impression that no-one had said they positively disagreed with the statement. But the way this data has been presented in the LGO’s response distracts from the fact that 27% of staff positively disagreed with the statement that the LGO provided a great service to their customers, of whom 7% strongly disagreed with the statement, resulting in a total of 61% of staff either disagreeing with the statement, or feeling unable to agree with the statement with any degree of confidence. This can only have been deliberate misrepresentation of their staff’s opinions, and it is so typical of the spin-doctoring with which the LGO attempts to dupe both the public and those principled politicians who would not tolerate the behaviour of the LGO if they were fully aware of what is happening.Although time does not permit me to analyse the External Review in the same way that I have analysed Dr Kirkham’s article, I do hope that the Committee will compare the very positive report the External Reviewers have gifted to the LGO, with the damning indictment of the LGO provided by the LGO’s own staff in their Staff Satisfaction Survey that was sent to LGO Watch by a member of LGO staff, and that I have shared with the Committee. The two simply do not match up. An independent External Review should have been carried out by people who are completely independent from the body being reviewed. The LGO were founder members of the British and Irish Ombudsman Association (BIOA). Dr Kirkham certainly was a member of the BIOA in the recent past, and may well still be now, along with the LGO. (Please click on the link below and scroll to near bottom: “Member of British and Irish Ombudsman Association” http://www.shef.ac.uk/law/staff/academic/rkirkham .)As far as I am concerned, a professional association tends to function as a union that exists for the benefit and support of its members. Accordingly, I do not see how one member of an association can be considered to be truly independent from another member where the investigation of professional good practice is concerned.As far as the other two members of the Review Team are concerned, Mr Jim Martin, as the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman, was also criticised by Scottish Public Services Ombudsman Watch in similar ways to which LGO Watch criticised the LGO. How could he therefore seriously be considered someone who would be likely to review the LGO impartially? As the SPSO, Mr Martin was also almost certainly a member of BIOS, and perhaps still is. Mr Richard Thomas was the Information Commissioner at one time, which is essentially just another name for an ombudsman. Legally, the LGO are also commissioners, of course. I am sure that Mr Thomas is very likely to have been a member of BIOA when he was a commissioner, and may well still be a member. More importantly, he was in 2009 elected as Chairman of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council. This Council is loaded with members who are Ombudsmen and 'friendly' academics, albeit not Dr Kirkham:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Administrative_Justice_and_Tribunals_CouncilIn 2010 the Government wanted to abolish the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Councilhttp://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmselect/cmjust/965/96504.htmbut it has only recently folded:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Administrative_Justice_and_Tribunals_CouncilIf the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council had been doing their job properly, a component of which was to keep under review administrative justice, then the LGO, the SPSO and the Public Services Ombudsman for Wales would have been improved a long time ago. Furthermore, if they were doing a good job, why did the Government abolish them? So why would the CLG Committee expect the ex-Chairperson of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council to do something now that he had failed to do when he was the Chairperson: that is, to effectively review the performance of the LGO?However one decides to describe the professional relationship between the LGO and the Reviewers, it appears to be a very incestuous one. The BIOA, the AJ&amp;TC, Ombudsmen, LGO-friendly academics: all the usual parties keep cropping up. A far cry from what looks like independent external evaluation from where I’m sitting. The Committee asked me to provide further, detailed evidence of bias and whitewashing in the External Review. I have provided a great deal of evidence above, but any amount of evidence can be rejected as an indication of bias, if the person evaluating the evidence is, for any reason, simply unwilling to see the bias. Although a legitimate judgment of bias will be based on reasonable evidence, it is ultimately a subjective interpretation: and those people who have vested interests in not seeing bias will always be able to say that, in their opinion, no bias is in evidence, and they may be skilled in selecting the counter-evidence they adduce to justify their position.Where the behaviour of the LGO is concerned, and the behaviour of those who defend and protect it, there are values at play that are profoundly opposed to the kind of values that reflect the best of British society. The culture of selfishness, of dishonesty, and of protection of vested interests at the expense of the poor and vulnerable, is one that is alien to what is best in British culture; and no matter how much those entrusted with the power to change this situation let us down, there will always be good, decent citizens in this country willing to expose and challenge institutional wrongdoing, as well as a media that from time to time succeeds in ensuring that such wrongdoing is exposed, and that those responsible for and complicit in it, are eventually held to account. Gary PowellNovember 20131&#xa0;