&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Written evidence from ]]]

[[[Chris Hobbs, ]]]

[[[Retired Metropolitan Police officer [CST0018]]]]&#xa0;I was born in London and have  lived here all my life. I come from a ‘police family’ and have relatives still serving within the force. My last ten years of service were spent working on Operation Trident related matters at UK and Jamaican airports. I have, however, extensive contacts throughout the Met which I have retained. I am aware of the frustrations of serving officers and their fears of expressing their concerns to senior managers for fear of repercussions. I had personal experience of this when in June 2010, I wrote a letter intended for the press which, in addition to criticising Ken Clarke,  also referred extensively to crime figures. This included  the fact that damaging Met police gun crime figures had been excluded from the Met’s annual report. I sought advice from the Met’s Press Bureau and was told to submit it to them for scrutiny, which I did.  Despite that, I was hauled before my Chief Superintendent and accused of being 'unprofessional.' There was, so my Federation rep told me, a considerable body of opinion at the top of Scotland Yard that wanted me sacked. However they couldn't as I had formally submitted it internally first.13 months later I was forcibly retired albeit with a certificate of exemplary service.  My service record is beyond reproach and involved football related violence, Asian community tensions and international organised crime networks that blight the black community. Shortly after my retirement I was presented with a ceremonial sword and saropa (scarf) by the UK’s largest Sikh temple. Despite this record  ‘dissent’ saw the end of my police career and this is the reason why ‘junior’ police officers will remain silent in the face of dubious police practices.The officer, James Patrick is likely to be shown as an example of what happens to officers who speak out. His decision to provide a submission to yourselves is extraordinary given the situation in which he finds himself. His book, ‘The Rest is Silence’ is in fact a restrained but disturbing critique of the police reform process. He does not advocate any form of militant action by front line officers, in fact quite the reverse. By forensic examination based on fact, he casts doubt on the process and the motives of those responsible for it. The Met’s  Commissioner  appears determined to send a signal to his rank and file that ‘rocking the boat’ will have consequences.  Below is my submission in respect of crime figures. They are an amalgam of views from front line serving officers who are concerned at the machinations of managers in respect of crime figures. There is also comment in respect of the Crime Survey for England and Wales which is also used by police forces to support their mantra of falling crime. &#xa0;Crime Figures-Are We Being treated As Fools?1). As a retired Met officer, I watched sadly back in July, as a BBC London news report showed a builder’s experience having had all his tools stolen from his van. In a stunning display of efficiency, the next day he received one of the Met’s standard ‘Sorry you have been a victim of crime-case closed.' letters. This in spite of the fact that CCTV footage showed two men removing the tools and placing them in a vehicle where the number plate was clearly visible.2). Why could this lead to rejoicing at the highest level of the police service? Quite simply because the huge percentage of the public who won’t bother reporting crime will doubtless increase as a result of either viewing the programme in question or reading newspaper reports. This will  enable the mantra of crime is going down to continue to be sung from the rooftops as has been the case with the release of yesterday’s crime figures. 3). At least when Kent police were criticised in the summer for the recording and manipulation of their crime figures, the Police Crime Commisioner and Chief Constable had the decency to state that the situation was unacceptable and would be addressed. 4). But what is the truth around crime figures and how much reliance can we give to figures produced by individual police forces and the British Crime Survey now renamed the Crime Survey for England and Wales?5). Shortly after I joined the Met in 1978, I quickly found out how crime figures could be massaged. Every Saturday there was a local market opposite Southall police station where dippers (pickpockets) would frequently be in action.6). Members of the public used to form queues that stretched outside the police station to report their wallets and purses stolen. Our instructions as constables, were to report the loss as a theft only if the victims actually felt or saw their property being removed. If, as in most cases, they were unaware of the removal of their property, it was recorded as ‘Property Lost in the Street’ thus avoiding an unwelcome addition to the crime figures.7). Another controversial ‘massage tool’ was in respect of attempted burglaries. When burglars left ‘jemmy marks’ around window and door locks where they had attempted to break in but failed, the classification of the more serious ‘attempted burglary’ would be downgraded to a more palatable and less serious offence of criminal damage. The same would be true where a window was smashed in an attempt to get at the door or window lock. Does this still apply today?  Any inspection worth its salt would unquestionably confirm that it does. 8). Similar issues can be seen in respect of robbery offences.  If an individual surrounded by a group of youths, produces ‘upon request’ his mobile phone for them to ‘have a look at’ and that phone is then snatched from out of his hand, is that offence classified as a robbery or a less serious theft? Even where an assault has taken place, the offence of robbery frequently is ‘downgraded’ to ‘theft and assault’ or even just theft. 9). I have even been told by serving officers from two forces that crime victims are even being telephoned and asked to ‘unreport’ their previously reported crime in order to reduce the figures. An example of this would be where a car windscreen is found smashed by its owner the next morning and the police assumption is that it just could have been a stone thrown up by a passing car. 10). This is given credence when, earlier this year, it was revealed  that Met Police Sapphire Units, responsible for investigating serious sexual offences, were persuading rape and sexual assault victims to withdraw their allegations. The reason; to boost their crime figures.11). Across London and doubtless elsewhere, officers normally of Detective Inspector rank, will pour over crime reports ostensibly to supervise them. In actual fact they will be looking to ‘no crime’ or to reduce the classification to a serious offence illustrated above. Another trick of the trade is to send the statutory, ‘We are sorry you have been the victim of crime’ letter and then after the letter has been sent, to reclassify the reported crime as ‘no crime.’ The victim will still have his crime number in case of an insurance claim.12). But what of the England and Wales Crime Survey. For this report, around 67,000 households are selected, and then one person from each of those household. A letter is sent and then, if the householder responds, the household visited by a BMRB (British Market Research Bureau) researcher who asks questions of one household member in relation to them being victims of crime.13). So, how likely is it that households on recession hit, gang dominated housing estates will invite BMRB researchers into their homes to discuss local crime. Will the drug dealers on those estates speak candidly to BMRB researchers about  being the victim of ‘run ups’ an all too common crime in these areas where one drug dealer is robbed of his drugs or cash  by others.  14). Those working deep within the world of underprivileged youth will tell you that many stabbings and shootings remain unreported. Since hospitals have been required to report all knife and gun wound admissions (and many still don’t) a street level expertise has built up around the ‘self treatment’ of knife wounds with superglue while a cottage industry has emerged whereby both qualified and unqualified back street doctors and nurses treat gunshot and knife wounds. 15). Of course further down the scale, every minor act of graffiti is a crime, every drugs deal (of which here are probably tens of thousands every day) is a crime, everyone who possesses drugs commits a crime. I’ve received dozens of emailed requests in the last five months ostensibly from Paypal attempting to obtain my details and of course each one is technically a crime. Every other similar phishing attempt to extract account details is a crime, every act of shoplifting is a crime. Of course, mercifully for the government, these crimes will frequently go unreported. 16). It doesn’t say much for our modern society that these days, even medium sized stores have security guards but even where a shoplifter is unlucky enough to be caught, it is likely that that apprehension will merely be a blip in his or her career. For many stores, big and small, the effort of embarking on a prosecution which could end up at Crown Court is simply not cost effective. Many major stores will merely apprehend the suspect, reclaim the goods and ban that individual from the store.&#xa0; 17). The most recent British Retail Crime Survey suggests that retail crime has increased by a huge 15.6% and that most disturbingly; only one in eight shoplifting offences are actually reported to police. 18). Police have increased their target response times in line with police cuts which means that in the mayhem of Friday and Saturday nights, the incident will probably be over and the victim gone by the time officers arrive. 19). Where police arrive when the incident is in progress the response is often to give individuals involved a fixed penalty notice rather than to arrest them for a serious offence in order that those same hard pressed officers can remain out on the streets and continue to deal with incidents. Thus again the result is a clear distortion of actual crime figures. 20). Police chiefs will certainly be aware, as are politicians, that the public will be more willing to accept cuts if they believe crime is being reduced. 21). The sad fact of policing today is the fact that quite simply, nowhere for officers to go if they are concerned with either poor operational decisions, facts being concealed from the public or even dubious practices that border on corruption.22). They are told to ‘go through channels’ but if there is no confidence in senior management or force  Professional Standards Departments then the only option is ‘whistle-blowing.’ Sadly police officers are not permitted to directly contact the IPCC. Only the bravest or very foolish police officer would now go down the ‘whistle-blowing’ road as there is currently what can only be described as a witch hunt against anyone who has spoken ‘out of turn’ to the media. 23). Rather like priests and nurses, those officers who do ‘go through channels’ to report concerns are likely to encounter a less than subtle and indeed sinister  form of intimidation which is aimed against anyone who fails to toe the ‘party line’ or who rocks the boat. 24). Police parlance in relation to ‘getting shafted’ or ‘doing his or her legs’ is just as common now as it ever was and refers to police managers taking ‘unofficial’ revenge on the unfortunate officer who is considered to have not ‘toed the line.’25). The recommendation by Lord Leveson, that officers are allocated a hotline to report concerns to are greeted with derision. Many officers will refuse to complete anonymous staff satisfaction surveys such is their distrust of senior managers. Those surveys in most forces show a staggering lack of confidence in senior management. (see ‘What do they know website’ and search on police staff surveys). 26). All this is compounded now by what appears to be a witch hunt in respect of any officer who may have made some form of ‘non-corrupt’ contact with the media.  Rank and file officers agree that the Met and police service in general are on the verge of a very real crisis.27). With the national debt increasing, the recession continuing and life becoming ever more difficult, especially for those in deprived areas where gangs and criminality flourish, the dubious assertions of continuing success in terms of police numbers and crime figures will count for nothing if we once again stand on the precipice of even more serious disorder than we saw during those terrible days in August 2011. 28). The bottom line is that whether crime is falling or not, the actual number of crimes being committed is far, far higher than government ministers or senior police officers would have us believe-but of course falling crime is good news for both election prospects, promotion prospects and of course honours. &#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;