&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from Philip Lund (HSR 00]]]

[[[7]]]

[[[)]]]HS2 – to Birmingham and Manchester, but who benefits?A Virgin train glides into Manchester Piccadilly station, just one of 46 trains each weekday doing the journey in as little as 127 minutes.  These trains stop locally en route, offering those living in the south Manchester suburbs the opportunity to join the trains at one of three stations on two different routes, as well as providing a fast twice-hourly service to London from Stoke-on-Trent.This is the service, much improved by extensive and expensive modifications to the track, signalling and other infrastructure over a decade, which the Government is now seeking to supplement by a new HS2 route, track and service - initially between London and Birmingham, but with one of two spurs extending to provide a High Speed link between Manchester and the capital.The distinction between ‘fast’ trains, travelling at speeds up to around 125 mph, and ‘High Speed’ trains is essentially arbitrary, being different in different countries and even in the EU being dependent on whether the tracks are new or upgraded.  Indeed the current services, which run on upgraded tracks, already achieve speeds for this EU classification though these speeds are substantially lower than those planned for the proposed new ‘Ultra High Speed’ system.  This is known as HS2 since Great Britain (Northern Ireland has its own rail system) already has one High Speed rail link – that through the Channel tunnel to Brussels and Paris, with High Speed connections beyond to other countries and places.  Surely, the argument goes, if other countries have, and are to have, more High Speed trains then Britain should not be left behind?However, from a rational - as opposed to a political – point of view, that presupposes that the geography and demographics of Britain and the other countries are similar.  This is not however the case: certainly in England the distances between the major cities are shorter than in the main comparator countries; and the populations based in and around those cities tend to be more dispersed than elsewhere since – at least outside London – the more affluent members of the population, and hence the more frequent users of such long distance rail routes, tend to live in dormitory suburbs and, increasingly, more rural locations.  Moreover in England there are multiple centres of population, not all of which can expect to be served by the proposed High Speed routes. The justification for HS2 on the basis of savings in travel time is based on comparisons of times between the termini rather than for door-to-door journeys.  They thus exclude the additional time which many travellers would have to spend travelling to and from the terminal stations as opposed to boarding trains at one of the more local stations currently served by the existing fast routes.  Already, in the case of Birmingham, many rail travelers from the south of the city prefer to catch a Chiltern Line service from stations such as Solihull or Warwick Parkway rather than travel further to catch the faster speed Virgin service from the centre of Birmingham, the airport or Coventry.  If this happens now would there not be the same tendency when the access point is limited to just one station in Birmingham? This point has apparently been overlooked (or understated) in the cost-benefit appraisals of the case for HS2, with consequent effects on the forecasts of fare revenues and time savings.  High ‘public’ benefits have been attributed to the saving in time spent on the main part of the journey – which time is rarely ‘lost’ due to the provision of various business facilities on trains and the opportunity to make use of the time spent on them – whereas account does not seem to have been taken of the greater amount of mainly wasted time taken in reaching city centre termini.  Moreover it can be questioned whether the valuation of time savings as a benefit to the economy as a whole (i.e. as an ‘externality’) does not duplicate the payment for those time savings already incorporated in fares.  If HS2 may not be the ideal solution to the forecast need for the provision of more and better rail services is there any other solution?  First, it should be recognized, even by one such as I (who am instinctively favourably disposed to rail as a means of transport), that there are many journeys for which rail is not, and cannot be, a convenient form of travel; that it may be unrealistic to project the recent rapid growth in rail passenger numbers far into the future; and that technological developments, and both the increasing real cost of energy and wider environmental concerns, may result in lower growth in transportation (by all modes) in the future.  Moreover, even leaving these more speculative and longer-term considerations aside, there are other solutions to the perceived problem of capacity constraints on these major inter-city parts of the existing rail network.  The concept of ‘capacity’ is rather nebulous in the case of rail transportation, it being dependent on such factors as train and platform length and signalling technology.  Modern technology should allow greater usage of a line, with shorter distances between trains.&#xa0;Following on from the thoughts expressed above, there is a case for facilitating the use of rail by the provision of more Parkway stations, thus allowing people the convenience of driving from their home to a station without having to encounter the congestion associated with city centre stations.  Those MPs with constituencies in north Cheshire (such as Tatton and Weaver Vale) who favour the HS2 proposal – on the grounds of ‘bringing the north and London closer together’ – should try to evaluate what proportion of their constituents would have quicker rail journeys to London by using an HS2 from the centre of Manchester as opposed to travelling from stations such as Wilmslow or Crewe on the existing services (the speed of which is likely to be enhanced by the time HS2 would be operational).  Such constituents would probably be better served by a new Cheshire Parkway station on the existing West Coast mainline, between Warrington and Crewe.  &#xa0;It should also be recognized that not all rail passengers put a high priority on time savings – for some leisure travellers, cost and even pleasantly routed journeys are relevant considerations.  Thus any perceived capacity constraint with respect to rail travel between London and Manchester could be eased by a reopening of the short missing link (between Chinley and Matlock) in the route used regularly whilst the West Coast mainline was being electrified in the 1960s.  This route would then link in, at Derby, with the existing Midland mainline which is due for the type of improvement already provided on the main routes to its east and west.  Moreover this line terminates at St Pancras, thus giving direct access to the HS1 routes to the Continent.&#xa0;One apparent oddity about the HS2 proposal is that its London terminus is to be at Euston station rather than St Pancras, the terminus for HS1.  This means that some passengers may have to transit between the two stations (which are about 600 yards apart), though some services will proceed directly onto the HS1 route.  There are other oddities in the proposed route, for example the location of the proposed Birmingham terminus some distance from the city centre and thus at a point less convenient for that centre than the existing termini of New Street and Moor Street.  Also the route does not go near the existing main corridor of London – Birmingham transport routes (the M1 and the West Coast mainline) and thus does not afford the possibility of easy access to the latter if and when required.  In particular the route does not go near Milton Keynes, the main locus of development between London and Birmingham and the most obvious location for any possible future station serving the south Midlands.Instead of passing through this already developed, and thus relatively ‘spoilt’, countryside the proposed route passes through some fine and currently largely unspoilt countryside, both on the outer fringe of the London commuting area (the Chiltern hills) and in Warwickshire.  It is thus not surprising that the existing residents of those areas are strongly opposed to the proposal but their concern for their local environment and peace and quiet is not the only reason to be sceptical about this proposed enhancement of GB’s existing rail network.  There are other means by which to improve the existing rail system and so enhance the nation’s international competitiveness – ones that would bring benefits to more people without impinging so harmfully on others.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;Annex: 

[[[Suggested questions for the meeting of the]]] 

[[[Transport Select Committee Meeting on 26th November at which Patrick ]]]

[[[McLoughlin]]]

[[[ and KPMG are to answer questions on the KPMG Report “]]]

[[[HS2: The Regional Economic Impact]]]

[[[”]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;1.  The analysis is based on the estimation and then use of production functions linking regional estimates of output to the normal inputs in such a relationship and also to measures of connectivity. &#xa0;The method of deriving coefficients for the latter has been criticised by Professor Overman because of the 'non standard' method of dealing with the problem of multicollinearity between the separate measures of connectivity. &#xa0;However it is not clear how measures were derived of connectivity, both for the current position and for the hypothetical 'with HS2' position. &#xa0;Could you please explain this, since it would seem that the results are dependent also on the figures input for these variables? &#xa0;&#xa0;Linked to this it might be questioned as follows:&#xa0;2.  Have any tests been conducted to examine the sensitivity of your findings to the extent of separation of your local areas?The relevance of this second question is that HS2 will have fewer stopping places than existing trains and thus measuring connectivity from a central point within a local area and with a prospective HS2 station may tend to overstate the effect on the more outyling parts of that same area.November 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;