&#xa0;Written evidence from Vincent Nolan (HSR 009)&#xa0;1. The last independent enquiry into Britain’ railway system was the 2006 Eddington Committee. Its findings were adopted by the then Labour Government in its 2007 White Paper; they did not include High Speed Rail&#xa0;2. In 2009, a government reshuffle produced a U-turn in railway policy: HS2 Ltd. was created as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Dept, for Transport (DfT). This organisational change effectively changed the role of DfT from objective evaluation of all transport options to a cheer leader for HS2. &#xa0;3. The strategic case for HS2 has never been subjected to independent evaluation. Recent revelations by Ministers at the time (Alistair Darling, Peter Mandelson and particularly Rail Minister John Harris) suggest that HS2 was adopted primarily for electoral reasons, with little more than a ‘back of an envelope’ evaluation. The DfT’s evaluations have been those of an advocate not an objective assessor.&#xa0;4. When the project has been submitted to independent scrutiny by bodies like the Public Accounts Committee, National Audit Office and the Major Projects Authority, it has been found to be seriously flawed. The TSC itself in its 2011 Report produced a list of recommendations to HS2 Ltd. which have been largely ignored. Independent analysis from such diverse bodies as the New Economics Foundation, the Institute of Economic Affairs and the Institute of Directors have condemned the project, as have serious media commentators such as the Economist, Telegraph Guardian etc. Public opinion is now firmly opposed to it.&#xa0;5. The Coalition Agreement included an intention to build a high speed rail network as part of our plans for a low carbon economy. The TSC concluded previously that claims for reduced carbon emissions from HS2 “did not stand up to scrutiny”. HS2 is opposed by the Green Party. In fact HS2 will significantly increase carbon emissions because of its ultra high speed specification requiring higher energy use and the transfer of passengers from conventional rail services. It also encourages a vast increase in long distance travel, when a low-carbon strategy would discourage travel (as with the DfT’s work from home campaign).&#xa0;6. HS2 is diverting resources from investment in 21st century technology in favour of (souped-up) 19th century technology. For example, we urgently need a&#xa0;national&#xa0;high -speed fibre-optic broadband network; we need to support transport developments like electric cars, particularly Google's driverless car experiment. In 20 years time, when HS2 is scheduled to be completed, technology will have transformed the way we do business, as it has in the last 20 years. The Government's forecasts of passenger numbers (300,000 a day!) take no account of the impact of new technology.&#xa0;7. The successful bullet trains in Japan and France were innovations of the 60s and 70s. We are 50 years behind and the world has changed. More recent investments in HSR in countries like Spain have brought no economic benefits and have compounded their debt problems. HS2 will have similar effects here. And the construction costs per km.of HS2 are 

[[[10 times]]] those of European high speed railways&#xa0;8. The Government is addressing HS2 as a delivery problem, analogous to delivering the Olympics. It is a false analogy. When a bid for the Olympics is selected, the bidder has no option but to deliver what they have promised; it is a commitment to the world sporting community. It does not matter how flawed the rationale behind the bid or how dubious the cost estimates were. The successful bidder has to ‘do what it takes’ to deliver to specification and on time, even if the costs increase fourfold beyond the original estimate, the Armed Services have to be called in when the private contractor fails to recruit the stewards required and immigration controls have to be relaxed to cope with the inflow of visitors. Anything goes, “whatever it takes”. But this is a most unsuitable model for HS2. The issue with HS2 is whether it is the best solution to the problems it purports to solve (which shift as the rationale for each one proves to be unfounded) and whether it provides good value for money compared with the range of alternative infrastructure investments it could be spent on. &#xa0;9. I urge the TSC to call for an independent, objective and thorough examination of UK transport strategy to determine whether High Speed Rail, and in particular HS2, is the most economic way of meeting Britain’s future transport needs. There is a real danger that the Government will rush into an irrevocable commitment to a bad investment, which (like the aircraft carriers) will prove too expensive to cancel when we realise we do not need it.&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;