&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence]]]

[[[ from T]]]

[[[he TaxPayers’ Alliance ]]]

[[[(HSR 010)]]]1. Founded in 2004 by Matthew Elliott and now with 80,000 supporters, the TaxPayers’ Alliance (TPA) fights to reform taxes, cut spending and protect taxpayers. You can read more about our work at www.taxpayersalliance.com.&#xa0;2. The TaxPayers’ Alliance has long had severe concerns about the cost and value of the HS2 project and believe the Government – and indeed Opposition parties – should urgently be reviewing its worth because a very weak case for it going ahead is only getting weaker. In recent weeks, we have seen the Treasury Select Committee call for the project to be put on hold, following on from alarm bells being sounded by the National Audit Office and Public Accounts Committee, while the number of senior politicians from across the political spectrum signalling their outright opposition to the project is also growing by the week.3. Over the last two years, the TaxPayers’ Alliance has published a number of pieces of research questioning the basis on which HS2 has got the go-ahead, namely: 4. We updated that research in late September 2013 with a new report, HS2 will not solve capacity issues on Britain’s railways, demonstrating how the already weak case for HS2 is continuing to unravel. This report is available to view online at: http://www.taxpayersalliance.com/hs2capacity.pdf5. With proponents of the scheme having stopped arguing for it in terms of faster journeys and instead claiming it is needed to address a lack of capacity, we specifically challenged the argument that HS2 is required to provide extra capacity on West Coast Main Line (WCML), because:6. The report also updated earlier TPA research to identify the extent to which dozens of towns and cities across Britain would in fact see a worse service if HS2 goes ahead, based on information buried on the Department for Transport website:7. In advance of the Government making its own claims with its revised business case, the report also demonstrated that there has been a dramatic deterioration in the business case for HS2 because there have been increases in capital costs and a number of additional costs that would have to be incurred in order to live up to ministers’ promises for the new line.8. As far as the KPMG report is concerned, we believe it was utterly dishonest for the Government to have spent £250,000 of taxpayers' money on an entirely new method of assessing the merits of a transport project and then only to apply it to its preferred scheme.  Worse still, the deliberate removal of figures showing the areas that would lose out if HS2 goes ahead amounted to cherry-picking findings. This was further evidence, if it were needed, that the KPMG report was a taxpayer-funded propaganda exercise.9. Our response to the publication by the Government of The Strategic Case for HS2 in October 2013 was that it was another attempt to make the numbers behind HS2 stack up that was yet again found wanting. Those in charge of HS2 were finally forced to admit that people on trains do not have zero productivity because they can and do work while travelling. Yet a convenient increase in the number of business passengers projected to use the line allowed the report’s authors to limit the reduction in the benefit-cost ratio (BCR). 10. We were also very surprised that the Department chose to quote the project’s BCR including the value of wider economic impacts, given that this is not standard DfT procedure for assessing the merits of transport projects. The Government needs to explain why this was done. 11. The case for HS2 is now flimsier than ever.  No amount of spin or re-hashing of the figures will change the fact that HS2 would be a huge white elephant, costing every family in the UK a fortune and failing to deliver the investment which the UK transport network really needs.12. In summation, the TaxPayers’ Alliance believes that the entire project should be abandoned now before any more taxpayers’ money is squandered on it.November 2013&#xa0;