&#xa0;Written evidence from William Hare (CYS0002)Dear Committee, you have posed the following questions:There is also debate about the behaviour of drivers and cyclists and whether more can be done to promote compliance with the law. Concerns have also been expressed about whether vehicle and road infrastructure could be changed to protect cyclists and whether new developments, such as London’s cycle superhighways, are safe. We would like to stimulate debate on all of these matters.”&#xa0;

[[[We would like to hear views on:]]]&#xa0;1. I have been a cyclist in London since the 1970s and still occasionally need to do so when passing through or visiting friends although I try and avoid it now as I consider it too dangerous.2. I cannot be bothered to formally set out a submission as per your Guidelines since just about everything that needs to be known about cycling safety is already known and to formally “answer” your questions is therefore a waste of time.3. I mainly wish to state my utter disgust at the present situation where it is de facto legal to kill, maim, or threaten to do either or both of these provided that the victim is a cyclist (or pedestrian) and the perpetrator is driving a motor vehicle. This happens on a daily basis – much worse in my experience in London than anywhere else in the UK – on all roads in the UK.4. I wish to state my disgust that the police refuse to take this issue seriously.5. I wish to state my disgust that you – our elected representatives refuse to take this issue seriously.6. It is absolutely clear that if cycling safety is a priority for transport planners – and those tasked to enforce the rules - then cycling is not just safe it is the safest form of mass transport available to most people. When cycling is manifestly not safe (the situation in the UK) then this means cycle safety is not a priority. That’s why it’s dangerous, that is why motorists are free to kill with (almost complete) impunity.7. So long as farcical schemes such as the utterly risible “Cycling Super Highways” are considered a source of pride by our civic authorities rather than the object of contempt and ridicule that they are generally understood to be – by cyclists and non-cyclists alike in my experience – we are living in a country where many more unnecessary deaths are absolutely certain.8. We are also living in a country where a completely unmeasurable number of people (but surely many tens or hundreds of thousands) have already been intimidated off the roads that they pay for in their taxes by the refusal to allow them their share of access to those roads.9. The questions you raise (that I quote at the top of P.1) are so naïve, they reveal a depth of ignorance that makes your investigation almost certain to be pointless.10. Thank you for your attention, if you’ve bothered reading this far. If you want to know how to make cycling safe all you have to do is what every other British person who wanted an answer to the same question has done for the last 50 years: go to a country where they have achieved it already. Learn what they’ve done. And then do the same. The evidence is abundant and it has been around for most of my life – ‘do you give a damn?’, is the only question that needs answering now. I’m pretty sure I know what the answer to that one is.&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;