&#xa0;Written evidence from  Nancy Neville (HSR 021)&#xa0;We are in danger of making a serious public policy misjudgment on the issue of HS2 for the following reasons&#xa0;1)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The Government has not set out the objectives that the HS2 scheme is meant to address;&#xa0;&#xa0;2)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The Government arguments in favour of HS2 are ex post facto rationalisation of a project approved for other reasons and not made public;&#xa0;3)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The cost-benefit methodology is flawed. It embeds the status quo (pre-eminence of London) where one of the government’s ad hoc arguments claims to want to change this, ie the north-south divide&#xa0;GOVERNMENT OBJECTIVESAt various different times the public has been told that HS2 is good for various different things.  First there was the large infrastructure project to spend us out of recession. Next there was the wasted value of time on trains followed by overcrowding on the line and finally the healing of the north-south divide in income and property inequality.&#xa0;By not specifying what this project is meant to achieve, and of course it is acceptable to have several reasons if they are all genuine, the case both for and against has been unclear and targeted to special interests.  Without knowing what we are trying to achieve, how can we know whether HS2 will achieve them?  This is different from doing a cost-benefit analysis.  This is about identifying public good and finding a way in which to achieve it.Far from being able to make a trade-off between country-wide benefits versus damage to the environment, inefficient spending and a brain drain to London we do not know what the benefits are and why HS2 has been chosen as the spending project of the moment. The opposition knows exactly what the cost will be.  In fact, the only proper costing has been on the side of the opposition to HS2.  Given this, it would be rash to move any further ahead with the project at this stage.&#xa0;EX-POST FACTO RATIONALISATIONIn a frank statement to the FT in September, Peter Mandelson made clear that the project as put forward by the previous government was an idea arrived at when searching for big infrastructural projects that would help to spend us out of recession.  As one of the industries most hard hit was construction, this lined up nicely and was put forward without any further specification or costing.  It is unclear why the present government picked up the idea when times changed and the objectives (or at least the government’s defence) changed. Several new ‘reasons’ were put forward. The time-savings argument needs no rebuttal, it was embarrassing to hear it put forward and refutes itself on any reflection.&#xa0;What of the argument that HS2 would reduce crowding on the line?  I would need to know first, what of the other three lines cut from London to Birmingham (via Reading, from Marylebone and along the M1 corridor).  We are told a new line needs to be cut in order to be straight.  Why is straight necessary to relieve overcrowding? Why does it need to be high speed to reduce overcrowding? How does the cost of HS2 compare to putting longer trains on the line, running more trains, using all three existing routes in to Birmingham efficiently.&#xa0;The most objectionable rationale in favour is the one that it will heal the north-south divide. It is interesting that at the same time the British government is claiming that rail investment from London to the north will regenerate the north, the mayor of Paris is proposing rail to grande Paris in order to benefit Paris, ie bringing more workers in to the city and away from the (nearby) regions. Also, the Shinkansen in Japan has aided development at the two terminals Tokyo and Nagasaki but economic activity in between has reduced significantly. Clearly a better model is needed to understand the changes in behavioural patterns as a result of the change in both high-speed rail.  Further analysis would be needed to model behaviour given the reduction (in HS2’s own forecast) of local trains. Would local communities be hurt, would people use their cars more in consequence, would we need to subsidise fuel because we have forced people to travel by car etc.&#xa0;THE PROBLEM WITH COST-BENEFIT ANALYSISThe cost-benefit analysis is a flawed methodology and this becomes most apparent when considering the ‘benefits’ to the north argument. &#xa0;It is not always possible in a public policy project to align the costs and the benefits but if they do align then the project is most easily supported.  HS2 could do this:  build the high-speed link from the north to the north.  Why not a high-speed link (if that is what you want) from Birmingham to Liverpool and Newcastle or Edinburgh and Glasgow?  If this were done then the same people who bear the cost of the line through disruption due to construction, environmental damage, etc would also get the most benefit through connectivity.  There may also be synergies that would allow companies to work with other companies in the region and to bypass London.  I do not know if this is a good idea but I know that the costs and benefits fall more nearly on the same population. It may be worth exploring as mitigation of the north-south inequality. It at least removes one major objection that the benefits, if they exist, go to London and terminal cities and the costs are borne in areas of outstanding natural beauty in the Chilterns, Warwickshire and Oxfordshire.&#xa0;However, for any infrastructural project of this size in the UK it requires the numerical advantages of London to be positive: it needs to benefit London to tip the benefit-to-cost balance.  London has the numbers of people, the value of land, the proportion of GDP to attribute to a project to make it appear worthwhile.  IT HAS TO BENEFIT LONDON.  In this case, if London does not benefit then even if it makes sense for the north conceptually, cost-benefit analysis will not be sufficiently positive.  Cost-benefit analysis cannot be used for projects which attempt to change the status-quo. This will always be the case with cost-benefit analysis: It reinforces the position you are in now and cannot be used to justify a new order. How do you benefit the regions when you need the project to benefit London to make it work out?  This is the flaw. The government claims to want to benefit regions but to make the project show a positive benefit it needs to benefit London and the argument is circular and cannot do what the government claims.&#xa0;Of course, if this is not an objective of the project, and if the status quo is not to be changed, then my objection to cost-benefit analysis does not apply.  We do not know the objectives of the project, the government has not put them forward. First, the government must make clear what problems it is trying to solve with 50 billion pounds.&#xa0;I hold a Batchelor’s degree in mathematics from Dartmouth College and a Master of Public Policy from Harvard University.  I have spent years both in my education and work applying cost-benefit analysis and decision trees to projects primarily in energy policy and the environment in the UK, Europe and the US. I feel I have had sufficient experience to comment here on the difficulties of using cost-benefit analysis.  I believe that HS2 as it is currently configured is poor public policy and much needs to be done before a proper decision can be made.November 2013&#xa0;