&#xa0;Written evidence from Stephen Plowden (HSR 023)&#xa0;1.  In March 2013, I wrote to the Committee to say that unless it adopted the practice of replying to the arguments submitted to it, and explaining why it had rejected those that it did reject, I would not respond any more to the Committee’s consultation documents. I explained that I had been replying to the Committee or its predecessors for more than 30 years, and had taken a great deal of trouble over my replies, and that experience had shown that most of them had not been read. I pointed out that if it was true that all replies were carefully considered, then it would be a fairly simple task to summarise and reply to any points that had not been accepted. Unfortunately, the Committee has not introduced this reform. Somewhat against my better judgment, I am nevertheless replying briefly to the present consultation because of the importance and urgency of the subject. On this occasion, however, I have not attempted a full reply, but am making only a few hasty points.&#xa0;

[[[Regional effects]]]2. The Committee will have seen Paul Withrington’s critique of the KPMG study in which he claims that the estimate that HS2 would add £15 billion a year to the British economy is not only wrong but absurd. Mr Withrington’s calculations seem correct to me, broadly at least, so I hope the Committee will put them to KPMG. I hope the Committee will also question the DfT as to why it endorsed the KPMG report, albeit in a qualified way, without first getting peer reviews. Recently, the government made an estimate that the National Health Service spent £2 million a year treating foreign visitors, and that of that, about £500,000 was recoverable. Before publishing this estimate, the government obtained three peer reviews. It should have done the same with the KPMG study before referring to it approvingly in its own recent studies of HS2. &#xa0;3. Even if, which is out of the question, the KPMG figure were correct, it is a fallacy suppose that any and every increase in economic activity should be counted as a benefit. This idea is based on the belief that GDP is a measure of welfare, not just of activity (it is of course an imperfect measure even of activity). Of course economists know better, and under pressure they will agree that GDP is not a measure of welfare, but the moment the pressure is relaxed, they immediately revert to treating GDP as if indeed it were a measure of welfare. &#xa0;4. When one considers how good the train services between London and Birmingham, Manchester and Leeds now are, it flies in the face of common sense to suppose that the reductions in travel times that HS2 would bring could have the transformative effect on the economy that politicians are wont to claim. The present services are not only adequately fast, they are also extremely frequent. There are four or five trains an hour from Euston to Birmingham from 6 a.m. to 9 p.m. and another two from Marylebone. Frequency is at least as important as speed, and the frequency of British InterCity trains is one of several reasons why comparisons with the economic benefits that some people claim that high-speed trains have brought on the Continent are not relevant to HS2.&#xa0;5. Redressing the imbalance between London and the south-east and other regions is an extremely important objective. But not only is the impact of HS2 likely to be small, it could well be in the wrong direction. There is a lot of evidence that making travel between an economically strong region and a weaker one more convenient is at least as likely to suck activity out of the weaker region as to regenerate it. One way in which that might happen would be for people now both living and working in the West Midlands, or both living and working in the North-West, to find a job in London instead. The models used by HS2 Ltd are not capable evenof predicting this kind of redistribution of journey ends, still less of evaluating it. &#xa0;6. It is easy to think of other ways in which reducing travel times between London and other regions could adversely affect those regions. For example, a London firm of accountants contemplating opening a branch in Manchester could decide that if HS2 were built, there would be no point in doing so, since staff in the London office could so very easily get to Manchester and back in a day. For the same reason, a London firm which already had branch offices in Manchester and Leeds might well decide to save the overheads and close those offices. To regenerate the North, invest in the North and forget about improving links to London. (I am a Londoner and I regard the present predominance of London and the south-east as bad for this region as well as for the rest of the country.)&#xa0;

[[[CO2]]]7. We were originally told that HS2 was an integral part of the government’s low carbon transport strategy. In a letter to me of 3 November 2010, an official in the Direct Communications Unit at 10 Downing Street made the point especially strongly:&#xa0;The Government’s objective is to establish a high speed rail network as part of a programme to fulfil its ambitions for a low-carbon economy. The Government’s vision is of a truly national high speed rail network for the whole of Britain. Given financial constraints, this will have to be achieved in phases.&#xa0;This is cloud cuckoo land.  Establishing a low-carbon economy, and as part of that a low-carbon transport system, is a supremely important objective, but there was never the faintest chance that either HS2 or a national high speed rail network would contribute to it. In recognition of that fact, the government no longer lists reducing CO2 emissions as one of its objectives for HS2 (see paragraphs 36 and 37 of the Executive Summary of The Strategic Case for HS2 published in October 2013). Instead of revising the objectives to fit the proposed scheme, the government should of course have revised, or rather abandoned, a scheme which could play no part in meeting a vital objective. &#xa0;8. The government is, however, still claiming that the impact of HS2 would be positive in terms of carbon reduction, if only in a minute degree – so small as to account for 0% of the claimed benefits of HS2 for both the Phase One network and the full network (see the table in paragraph 5.1.1 of  Appendix 5 of The Economic Case for HS2, HS2 Ltd, October 2013 ). How the government arrives at the conclusion that there would be any reduction at all is a mystery. In paragraph 5.2.2 of this appendix, it is stated that 69% of the travel on HS2 would be diverted from classic rail, 26% would be new journeys, 4% would come from cars and 1% from air. Both the travel diverted from classic rail and the new travel would of course add to CO2 emissions. The likelihood is therefore, that HS2 will not just be irrelevant to efforts to reduce CO2, but counter-productive.&#xa0;9. I hope the Committee will pursue this subject mercilessly with DfT officials and ministers and that in so doing, it will raise the following paragraph in The Strategic Case for HS2:&#xa0;4.10.10 HS2 has the potential to play a key part of the UK’s future low-carbon transport system. At scheme opening HS2 will have lower carbon emissions per passenger kilometre than most other modes of transport.  HS2 is publishing a carbon assessment for Phases One and Two alongside this document. It shows that while carbon emissions will occur, over the full lifespan of the project (i.e. 120 years) HS2 is expected to be carbon beneficial.&#xa0;It seems highly implausible that HS2 would have lower carbon emissions per passenger kilometre than most other modes of transport, but I have not pursued this reference. But even if this statement is true, it is irrelevant. HS2 should not be compared with all other modes of transport, but with the modes that people who would use HS2 if it were built would use if it were not.&#xa0;

[[[“Predict and provide” – the impact of HS2 on the countryside and the urban environment]]]10.. The government claims that the increase in capacity that it says is required cannot be obtained by improvements to the existing network. This is quite untrue – the optimised network suggested by 51M comfortably provides all the capacity required to meet HS2 Ltd’s demand forecasts, implausibly high though they are. However, if it were true that only a new line could provide for the predicted increase in rail travel, what would the relevance of that finding be?&#xa0;11. In my book Towns Against Traffic, published in 1972, I coined the phrase “predict and provide”. This was a reference to the roadbuilding philosophy current at that time, which suggested that all demands for car travel had to be met, regardless of the financial cost or the environmental damage that would be involved in doing so. Of course, in considering how to meet the forecast demands, it was important to find a way that would minimise the cost and damage, but those considerations were not relevant to the decision of whether or not to build a road at all. Even at the time I was writing, this principle was already being chipped away for roads, since some value for money tests for road building had by then been devised, but at that time it still largely held, and possibly to an extent still does today. &#xa0;12. The current arguments for HS2 rest heavily on this “predict and provide” philosophy. The last sentence of the ministerial foreword to The Strategic Case for HS2 reads as follows. “In  parallel, we will continue to work with the construction and supply industry and with local communities to ensure that this unprecedented investment will deliver the best possible return to the British economy be built at the lowest possible cost, and the lowest possible environmental impact”. The theme is repeated in the Executive Summary, especially paragraphs 48, 49 and 68. For example, in paragraph 68 it is stated, “In designing the road and in mitigating the impacts of constructing and operating the railway, we have done as much as reasonably possible to avoid or reduce environmental impacts, particularly those that might affect residential areas, historic buildings, conservation areas, sensitive habitats and areas of natural beauty.” The theme appears again in paragraph 4.10.1. “The government understands that a large project, like HS2 will affect those who live close to the route and where the costs are justified everything reasonably possible is being done to mitigate the impact of HS2 on individuals, communities and the natural and built environment.” &#xa0;13. These statements all clearly suggest that the environmental impact, however regrettable, and however strong the case for mitigation, is not a consideration that could affect the question of whether HS2 should be built at all. But of course it could and does affect it. The countryside and the environment of towns are part of our national heritage and it is quite untrue to suggest, as the statement quoted above does, that only people living nearby care about its being damaged. To claim, as the government does that HS2 is a good investment for the country on the basis of a cost benefit analysis that completely ignores a consideration which in many people’s minds is the most important one of all, or at any rate is  second  in importance only to CO2, is absurd. &#xa0;14. This is not to suggest that the countryside should be included in a cost benefit analysis based on money values. In one of the business cases formerly put forward by HS2 Ltd an attempt was made to do that. The cost of impact on the countryside was estimated to be about £1 billion. If my calculations are correct, the implication of that would be that if the time taken by each of the journeys predicted be made by HS2 over the planning period were to be reduced by 1 ½ minutes that benefit would outweigh the environmental impact. I am a moderate believer in cost benefit analysis, but that kind of  trade-off is simply absurd. &#xa0;15. When Philip Hammond appeared before your Committee, I think it was in August 2012, he spoke in a way that suggested that although the environment could not be monetised, it was as important as the considerations that could be monetised, which implies that it should indeed be something that affects the decision on whether or not to go ahead at all. The questions and answers were as follows:Q551 Chair: The business case does not include the environmental assessments. Does that mean that the environment is seen as less important? 

[[[Mr]]]

[[[ Hammond]]]: No. It means that the business case includes the things that can sensibly be monetised. The things that can be monetised have been monetised.Q552 Chair: Do you monetise loss of beauty? 

[[[Mr]]]

[[[ Hammond]]]: No, you do not, and that is why the environmental impacts-the landscape impacts, for example-have not been monetised as part of the economic case. The economic case is only part of the case for high speed rail, as you know. The Department has an approach which considers five separate cases, of which the economic case is one and the environmental case is another.16. It cannot be said, however, that the countryside is infinitely precious and should not be touched in any circumstances. How, then, should it be taken into account? My answer is that it should be treated as a constraint, not an absolute constraint but a provisional constraint that could be set aside  if it could be shown that some other objective of national importance could not otherwise be met. If it were true that HS2 was crucial to reducing carbon, or to closing the north-south divide, or perhaps to housing the population decently, those would be the kind of considerations that would justify setting aside this constraint. Nothing like that applies in the case of HS2. 17. HS2 is not required for reasons of capacity, will not reduce carbon, will not help to reduce the north-south divide, but will have an unacceptable environmental impact. The reason that a scheme with all these damning faults was put forward in the first place is that instead of starting with the problems and working up alternative ways of tackling them, this government and its predecessor started with the “ solution”. The reason that the scheme still survives is that instead of admitting a mistake, ministers and civil servants have gone further and further into absurdity and dishonesty in defending the indefensible.  It is high time to put a stop to this. &#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;