&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Nicholas ]]]

[[[Zelle]]]

[[[ [FBB0017]]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;1                            The BBC should be like the Monarchy : it needs to be an excellent, non political ambassador that represents and serves the whole nation. It should also present unbiased, honest and serious information, educate, inspire, uplift, and entertain the nation. 2              The BBC seems to be getting bigger, 'flabbier', less critical of itself, careless, arrogant,  and outrageously generous to itself with public money. The recent Savil scandal suggests the BBC can be sloppy and very evasive.There are more TV and Radio channels. The more channels there are, the more diluted the quality of the programmes becomes. But probably Radio and local radio are doing better than TV.  There are excellent programmes but fewer of them. Many believe the BBC has been dumbing down. (We had a black and white TV with one channel - The BBC - I was allowed to stay up for 'The Cherry Orchard'. Now there are many channels with no programmes like the Cherry Orchard.) It seems everything now has to be 'popular' on all channels.  BBC 4 was planned as an 'Arts Channel'. But the 'arts' programmes have been watered down.  What is BBC 3 for? Reduce the hours broadcast and 'distill' the programmes into more powerful and potent offerings. Originally, 'heats' were broadcast weekly of 'Young musician of the year'.  Now with more BBC channels, the whole competition is condensed into a couple of programmes (with much time given to what the competitors ate for breakfast, and the like than their performances). Why?The BBC News channel seems to compare badly with Sky News, Algezeera, France 24, and even CNN. The BBC must have the most extensive news network of any? Building themselves (at public expense) the grandest News studio in the world seems to have resulted in a less concise and less interesting station.(And why waste so much air time every 1/4 hour with the same trailer?)Recently on BBC News International, for 12 hours, the main items of International news (every 15 mins) were the stock market floatation of 'Twitter' followed by the activities of the Mayor of Toronto.  Radio 4 still seems to be excellent but even this station shows clear signs of dumbing down. One programme in particular  - 'Dessert Island disks'. It was an interesting programme with a variety of people. Now most cast-aways are 'celebs', and the choice of discs has dumbed down dramatically. What a pity! The changes at Radio 3 are a national, and even an international, calamity. This once great programme was the envy of musicians throughout the world. It has suffered more fundamentally than other stations. The excuse given: it needs to appeal to a larger audience. Why? The BBC now offers listeners several more Radio stations. Does anyone worry that the BBC Asian service is only listened to by a small proportion of the nation?  It is illogical to dumb down this quality station. Instead, why not nurture new listeners on other stations - Radio 2 and Radio 4 - (Recently, Radio 3 presented 3 weeks of film music, and yet one of the nation's finest composers, was allocated a week-end in this, his centenary year!) The strategy has failed: fewer people listen to Radio 3 than ever before. This can only show that more former supporters are leaving than new listeners are joining. Does a second rate station attracting fewer listeners make sense?The latest listening figures show that the most dumbed down programme of all - the breakfast show on Radio 3 - lost 100,000 listeners in the last three month period : loosing 16% of its listeners in 3 months is a disaster. The experiment has failed. The BBC, and its excellent orchestras, champions modern music at the Proms as it should. It must be the most generous commissioner of new musical works in the world but does it use its financial clout wisely?  The vast majority of these performances are the premiers and also the derniers. Such a catalogue of total failures seems to be an extraordinary waste of public money.BBC Radio 3 is paranoid about the success of Classic FM. Why? Both programmes can be different and serve different members of society. (Would any one expect 'Simpson's-in-the-Strand' to add 'beefburgers and chips with mayo' to their menu to attract a larger number of clients? Or would anyone expect Oxford or Cambridge to offer 'Media studies' or the like, to attract more students? Of course not.)  And yet almost every change on Radio 3 is 'inspired' by Classic FM.It seems that the BBC have been poor at appointing staff. Year after year, rather colourless executives seem to run the organisation. Appointees should have vision, personality, and character to lead the various divisions. Does anyone at the BBC now have the vision, enthusiasm and inspiration of an Attenborough, or a Drummond? Recently, the new DG made a speech looking back at the quality of the BBC in the days of Lord Reith. Good news! But then a couple of weeks later we heard the 'Reith lectures' - given by a transvestite dressed in a farcical dress with orange shoes, and absurdly overdone 'make-up', who sadly seemed to have nothing of consequence to say, broadcast at 9.00am! Who is the DG trying to kid?3                            Yes. Surely far too many programmes do not relate in anyway to the high ideals of the Charter. Impartiality.  Many claim the BBC is politically biased. Probably the balance is not quite right.4                            The BBC should have unlimited scope, scale and remit within their financial constraints.5                            With several channels and stations, 'particular audiences' should be catered for. In the early days of TV, one single national station was able to cater for diverse national interests: excellent international and national news coverage, serious discussions, political debate, visits to live theatre, opera, farce, satire, humour, light entertainment, and many major sporting events. 6                            What ever produces the best quality programmes at the best value for licence fee payers. It is probably better to pay other (less profligate) organisations, to make as many programmes as possible for us.7                            The BBC must have the largest collection of radio and TV archives in the world and as all these programmes have been paid for by licence fee payers, it would be wrong to charge the British public any more to continue to enjoy them.8                            It would seem that the BBC is poor at spending money wisely on developing technology.9              The BBC should be publicly funded but it has grown too big, is out of control, and shows little concern for the way it spends public money.10              There ought to be. But, does Channel 4 spend its public funds more wisely?11              The arrangements in the UK, though not faultless, are infinitely preferable to those in the US.12              The BBC is too vast and unmanageable, and it has become careless and out of control. It lacks vision and focus. Like the NHS, it seems to be over managed and to be pointing in too many directions. It needs to aim at doing less, but doing it more skillfully and enthusiastically. And with less public money.13              Probably not. Would a 5 yearly review be a possibility? As with parliament, if the governors are making a mess of things, it would be an improvement to be able to make significant changes every 5 years.November 2013&#xa0;