&#xa0;Written evidence submitted by a Cyclist (CYS0014)&#xa0;Notes for the Parliamentary Inquiry into Cycle Safety&#xa0;Summary&#xa0;- Cycling is being treated too much as if it were some kind of a slightly dangerous job (i.e. with HSS rsponsibility) and not, as it should be, a pleasant means for anyone who can ride a bike to get around. &#xa0;- The failure to have cycling as safe as continental Europe is largely down to poor treatment of road junctions and poor training of road users in the UK.&#xa0;- Human nature means you can only go so far with training and law enforcement, and a country like the UK this can have only incremental success. Better road design is required for a step change, as similarly developed nations have realised.&#xa0;- Highway authorities should take at least as much responsibility as motorists and cyclists for the safety of cyclists but they cannot do this properly under current DfT rules.&#xa0;- Apply actual continental best practice, not some watered down version of it, but ensure that it is applied with consistency and continuity. It is partly the plethora of interventions that exists at present that leads to confusion that leads to mistakes and incidents. &#xa0;- Set up a system where the "little people" i.e. actual end-user cyclists, can record infrastructure problems. Don't just rely on the "sage" advice of a few self-appointed experts. Given the track record, there ARE no UK experts on cycle safety.&#xa0;------------------------------------Introduction&#xa0;In any discussion on safety we need to define the rights and duties of participants. Is it a right for a cyclist to be safe? I would say yes. Is it their sole duty to ensure that they are safe. I would say no, though they should have some. Do the drivers of HGVs or car's have sole duty to ensure cyclists are safe - well, according to the highway code they do have some duty, but again sole duty? No. You can argue the relative proportions as much as you like, and indeed it seems a lot of breath has been wasted in doing so, but it's not actually a binary thing. The highway authorities and government have some duty in this respect. My thesis is that, given human nature,  it is they who have been failing both cyclists and drivers (and pedestrians, but that's another debate), more than the latter have been failing each other. &#xa0;In one recent case of a cyclist's death the narrative verdict of the judge made reference to cyclist being lulled into a false sense of security by blue paint on Cycle Superhighway 2. This is exemplifies the problem. Unlike engineers, judges see much more of the variety of human behaviour and realise that there are a whole spectrum of behaviours by road users. You can't make everyone perfect, and in a developed nation like the UK you can't expect anything but the smallest improvements by focussing on that aspect. It is the way the road is structured in both space and time that makes the difference. This was appreciated decades ago in the safest countries for cycling. &#xa0;A great deal of good is done from bottom up by campaigners; more establishment organizations such as the CTC and Sustrans; and some local authority cabinets to ensure the highway authorities show some duty of care (if not statutory duty) to cyclists, but this is all bottom up intervention, and very patchy. There seems to be precious little coordinated top down steer (at least since the greatly lamented demise of Cycling England). The DfT appear to have even refused the help of people like Chris Boardman who many thought would make a good  cycling champion. Be that as it may, and being a cynical old boot, I would have said that this was politically unsound since Boardman is very popular, and we all know he could easily have been sidelined in such a post if things got awkward.  As it is the DfT are not looking good at the moment, in many people's eyes even less so than the Mayor of London and TfL.&#xa0;Anyway, in the light of the above here are my comments on the points you raise.  &#xa0;1 - Whether cycling is safe, particularly in towns and cities&#xa0;How safe do you need it to be?  I have seen it stated that the important thing on the roads is to maintain traffic flow and in some cases given as a reason why traffic signal phasing or road design (i.e. protected paths) cannot be installed to benefit cyclists.  The public would appreciate definitions of what the government considers "safe". How many deaths and serious injuries will they tolerate? Then the public would have some idea of whether they should cycle or not.  So far the government seem to be tolerating quite a lot (about 20000 reported deaths and any sort of injury in 2012, which is by my rough estimate about 1 in every 100 cyclists. So half the cyclists on the roads could expect some kind of injury once in their lives.)  In fact, I would say even the Netherlands is not safe enough, and they have the world's best cycle safety record. The key thing is that they themselves do not think so either, and continuously monitor cyclist problems and seek to improve safety. I see no evidence that the UK does this. Indeed the favoured modus operandi in the UK seems to be put something in, let it deteriorate to the point that the law suits start rolling in or public outrage becomes too vociferous. and then do something again. Potholes.  So for me the UK is not safe to cycle in. The main problem is that cyclists are too easily caught by inattention and appallingly aggressive driving from too large a proportion of motorists. But this is human nature  - Dutch motorists are no different (indeed they can be more aggressive outside their own roads)   - and I don't see how this can be changed by "soft" measures, like training and law enforcement . You have to look mainly at road design. This is what the Dutch realised 40+ years ago.&#xa0;But why "particularly in towns and cities"? The facts are that it is more dangerous to cycle on rural roads. But this again is beside the point. There needs to be a national steer for consistency and continuity of treatment across all roads regardless of location. Leaving it wholly up to individual LA's, has led to infrastructure that is so patchy and so unpleasant to use that it invites misuse, if only through frustration at the mess.&#xa0;Footnote: Andrew Giligan frequently says that the campaigners' focus on deaths and injuries puts people off cycling. I think people have made up their own minds not to cycle based on the unpleasantness of the conditions, not the threat of injury, and very few are cognisant of what happens outside the campaigning micro-universe. He and others should be focussing on the unadorned principle that the deaths and injuries are simply unacceptable. &#xa0;2 - What central and local Government could do to improve cycling safety. Ideas could include better training and advice for drivers and cyclists, better enforcement of the law applying to drivers and cyclists, and better vehicle and road infrastructure.&#xa0;Do as I recommend above, and improve the regulations of what "engineering"" interventions can be made: proper cyclists traffic lights; no unseparated lanes leading into junctions, remove unneeded traffic islands - use zebra and light controlled crossings instead. It's all been done before, in Europe. Use their expertise, Go on their study courses. Train highway engineers in those practices. Reinstate Cycling England with some continental contributors. The government has said it is planning to use French expertise for nuclear power stations, so why not use the acknowledged European experts for cycling?&#xa0;Training, advice, and law enforcement will only get you so far. I think the main areas of improvement should be training at school made available for all, and a mandatory module in in the driving test. Sure, other areas could be improved, but where is the evidence that such "soft" interventions have a significant permanent effect?  My position is that it would not be enough to save many extra lives. But don't listen to me, or your own esteemed opinions - get some data, maybe the Europeans have some. Civil law presumed liability s a good idea, though; after all, a moving car is intrinsically dangerous. Doing any more, however, risks removing people's freedoms to an unacceptable degree. People make mistakes, ignore advice and yes, some knowingly break the law. You can't stop it.  Go and learn what the Europeans do to mitigate this. In two words, road design. In addition, cyclists are not cycling as a profession. It's easy to pick up, can be fun, and should be accessible to all including youngsters, the infirm and the elderly without slight mistakes ending in death.&#xa0;Also many of the proposed soft interventions for cyclists (hi-vis springs to mind) seem like an attempt to professionalise them, when ordinary motorists and pedestrians are not treated the same way. This is not the correct route since it excludes the young, infirm and the retired; and is fundamentally inequitable.  &#xa0;And UK cyclists themselves know what the problems are so ask them i.e. set up a system where issues can be reported, considered and acted upon. If this had been done before (TfL for example were repeatedly warned about Bow roundabout designs)  there wouldn't have been the tragic deaths we are getting now.&#xa0;3 - Whether it would be desirable and feasible to segregate cyclists from other road users, including, for example, by prohibiting HGVs from entering city centres at peak hours.&#xa0;This question is framed in entirely the wrong way (as are the others really). It is extremely disappointing that the same old poorly conceived paradigm keeps being perpetuated decade after decade in the UK when every other country that has embarked on improving conditions for cyclists takes a different approach. &#xa0;In outline it's not rocket science:&#xa0;You try not to make road users with vastly different momenta cross each other's path at the same time  - they can go side by side or in single file  to a certain extent.   Treating the crossing points correctly is the key and that is where the UK has always failed, and judging by recent developments and the way the briefing note to us is framed, is going to continue to fail. &#xa0;At the most obvious danger points - where traffic flows are dense, fast ; at accident black spots; and at major junctions - yes, you segregate. Initially, this does not actually involve many roads, just the largest, busiest ones. Unless you accept this and do it, over and above what seems at present to be the sine qua non of maximising motor traffic throughput, the deaths and injuries will continue.&#xa0;On quieter urban roads you have ubiquitous 20 mph, on rural roads the speed limit depends on road width as well as sight-lines.  Give cyclists lanes if the road is wide, otherwise narrow the road to an extent that cars cannot overtake if a cyclist is there, without the cyclist allowing it.&#xa0;At a more advanced stage, if you have the room for a protected bike lane, put it in.&#xa0;With this, and a splash of presumed liability, most of the problems will evaporate, and you'll get more people cycling. with all the benefits that brings.&#xa0;Here's a typical UK solution for cyclists approaching a roundabout (Googe Streetview reference) Use your mouse to rotate it a bit if necessary.&#xa0;http://goo.gl/maps/hkI4W&#xa0;The (unacceptably narrow) cycle line just stops. And here's a Dutch one&#xa0;http://goo.gl/maps/njla5&#xa0;And a Danish one (though roundabouts are rare)&#xa0;http://goo.gl/maps/XK7Hc&#xa0;And a German one (roundabouts rare again)&#xa0;http://goo.gl/maps/64cv8&#xa0;And a French one&#xa0;http://goo.gl/maps/DKJlE&#xa0;The Dutch start where the UK ends and the rest continue where the UK one ends.&#xa0;Footnote: Roger Geffen often says that you cant simply copy Dutch infrastructure and expect it to work. Why not? Has it been tried?  I'm not sure it has, particularly the priortisation of pedestrians and cyclists at junctions. This sounds like an unsupported assertion to me. Why not German, Danish or French as above? If there had been full Dutch-style intervention at Bow roundabout, I would assert that none of the deaths would have occurred. ------------On HGV prohibition - the real reason you ban HGVs at peak times is to make life pleasanter for everyone else. The pedestrianised area of Kingston upon Thames is a good example. On the risk to cyclists issue -  there is one cycling HGV driver who regularly posts on cycling forums and he says visibility is not really an issue (unless like one recent high profile case the driver's eyesight is defective), attention is. What is disgraceful in the London deaths is that these trucks are being driven by people who must be seeing hundreds of cyclists a day and should be used to their behaviour, yet they are still are either not paying enough attention or trying to bully their way through. They are the professionals, cyclists (and pedestrians and ordinary motorists) are the amateurs. The haulage associations and police should be sorting this out. &#xa0;I think if you asked an HGV driver (and possibly most motorists), would they like cyclists to be kept away from them (by segregation and traffic light phasing), they would be in favour. But go ahead - ask them this question. The FTA recently decried any suggestion of a ban, but failed to come up with any alternatives.&#xa0;Thank you&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;