&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from Edward Stubbs, former Detective Sergeant, Metropolitan Police]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;My name is Edward Stubbs. I only recently became aware that a Parliament committee was looking into Police crimes at count figures. Some time ago a member of the Police Federation stated the reasoner Police dont act as Whistle blowers was because of The Leverson enquiry. I don't know how much Police service this member had but Police have been fiddlingintend crime figures for last 60 years long before  Leverson.&#xa0;I served 32 years in Metropolitan Police. Almost 29yrs as a Detective most as a Detective Sergeant. I worked at 12 different police stations including 3 years at Scotland Yard. The half mile distance from Edgware station to Church Street Market on Saturday was not paved with gold as in case of Dick Whittington. It must have been paved with wallets purses. The same with Oxford Street on late night shopping  on Thursday. In this day and  age it's mobile phones and purses. At both police stations would  queue at counter to report THIER property stolen. These matters were reported as THEFT FROM PERSON. When they were submitted The Detective Chief Superintendent at time said he wanted statements from all victims to prove THIER property was stolen. If they couldn't produce evidence of THEFT it was recorded as PROPERTY LOST IN THE STREET.as a result nothing was ever investigated as a crime. If by some miricle any one was arrested and admitted number of offences. The original offences were re-classified which improved the clear up rate. You then had clear ups for no crimes. &#xa0;The Home Secretary keeps saying reported crime figures are falling. this is down to members of the public NOT REPORTING CRIME BECAUSE THEY KNOW WANT BE INVESTIGATED. If an elderly person tries too report a crime they ar greeted was WE HAVNT GOT OFFICERS AVAILABLE? CAN YOU COME TO POLICE STATION AND REPORT IT? The reason there ar no Police available to report crime is because they ar manning road blocks to report minor Road Traffic Offences which boost the figures and dont need  great deat of brain power. They then spend rest time in Police station writing traffic reports.&#xa0;Numerous offeces of Burglary were reduced to NO crime or CRIMINAL damage. If a suspect was arrested and admired offences these were reclassified to improve clear up rates. Every day offences known as grid offences (MORE SERIOUS crimes) were suited to Divional Headquarters to be submitted to area headquarters then to Office in charge of crime to SCOTLAND yard who would then report to THE commissioner. Crimes of alleged RAPE were reduced to INDECENT assault. Police regulations stated ALL allegations or RAPE MUST be investigated by Detective Inspector. Numerous offencs of Rape were investigated by inexperienced detective due to pressure of work. This accounted for large number of not guilty verdicts.&#xa0;This is outside ur remit but you should know how save millions of pounds from Police budget. Get rid of half departments at Scotland Yard. When the decided to promote any one who had a degree in Plastercine or from legaland without any knowledge of police work. They had to create departments in Scotland Yard to place all Deputy Assistant Commissiones Commanders THIER Superintendent staff officers with all accompanying staff.they spent most days having meetings and issuing memos to justify THIER excistance. If private company was run like this it would go bankrupt in very little time.&#xa0;&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;