&#xa0;Written evidence from Alan White (CYS0022)&#xa0;I have been cycling regular for many years mostly in the Midlands. I do voluntary work to support cycling through Sustrans and the CTC. Through this work I talk to many people and especially would be cyclists. I have assisted with adult cycle training. The message I hear over and over again particularly from would be cyclists is "I would not cycle on road - its too dangerous". I used to spend a lot of time trying to refute this argument, but sadly I am afraid I am beginning to believe them myself. My own perception is that cycling has become significantly less safe and consequently I am now much more selective over when and where I cycle.The recent deaths in London are a great sadness to me, but I also feel enormous frustration because at the strategic level the problems are well understood and the answers known. These were articulated in the Get Britain Cycling Report which received unanimous support in the commons. IQuite simply you need segregation between a 100kg cyclist traveling at 10mph and cars and lorries with a mass 20-300 times greater, perhaps traveling 3 times as fast.Whilst this situation prevails, talk about education, training, behaviour, helmets, headphones etc. is just whistling in the wind. I am frustrated that the media and politicians focus on cyclist behaviour normally citing jumping of red lights. Whilst I agree this is unacceptable it pails into insignificance compared with motorists who speed, pass too close to cyclists and generally drive without due care and attention. Cycling in cities has become an extreme sport only to be attempted by the young confident and fit. It doesn't have to be like this. One only has to look overseas to Holland. Here cycling is a normal activity carried out daily by young and old. Cyclists are not kitted out in body armour, but they do have a proper segregated infrastructure. The Dutch reap enormous benefits from this infrastructure by providing a viable way to travel which reduces congestion and make cities more liveable . In turn this benefits the environment and the nation's health. This vision cannot be achieved overnight it requires vision, it requires leadership and it requires investment. Sadly I see none of these.As I cyclist myself for more than 30 years I have witnessed cycling becoming increasingly dangerous. I now very carefully choose when and where I cycle. There are very few segregated cycle routes available to me and even these are in a poor state of repair.The strategic solution will not happen overnight, so I would suggest the following tactical changes:- make 20mph the default speed limit where people live;- equip lorries with sensors to cover blind spots- ban hgvs during rush hour- more traffic infringement enforcement - more cyclist awareness training for motorists . - more cycle training particularly for adultsI must stress that these are tactical, and must not been seen as a substitute for a fit for purpose infrastructure.Do not on any account make helmets compulsory or ban cycling in any way. This is not solving the problem, but admitting defeat.&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;