&#xa0;Written evidence from Harris Vallianatos (CYS0023)1. I have recently started cycling to work after many years as a train commuter and driver.  My journey takes me through busy sections of Surrey and London, along major and minor roads.2. It is my opinion that cycling is not safe enough on our roads.  In two months I have had 2 physical scrapes with cars and many more near misses.  To me, the root cause is that at rush hour drivers do not want to be held up (we all leave it to the last minute in the mornings) and this sets up a conflict for the driver who may end up making a more risky manoeuvre and pass more closely than they would do normally.  I have noticed that at quiet times, drivers tend to leave me more room.  It could be said then that congestion levels and waking up late are as much to blame as driver errors.  3. I have witnessed equally bad behaviour by cyclists.  Whilst stopping at a roundabout last week for a car coming from the right, a cyclist overtook me and went straight over the roundabout narrowly missing a car.  Their perception of a safe gap was very different from mine and the car drivers. 4.  HGVs are just plain scary.  Even at 6 feet the wind and spray can cause shock if you’re not ready for it.  When they turn left, they simply can’t see you much of the time.  I do believe that HGVs need to be redesigned or retrofitted with mirrors that help drivers.  I also think that more research is needed into safety features that prevent cyclists from going under the wheels.  For cyclists, cycle training/awareness campaigns that create a gradual shift in attitude is needed so that some of us realise we do need to stop from time to time no matter how inconvenient. 5. Segregated cycling is much more comfortable and this should be available on all possible routes.  Lanes and cycle tracks involving more than just a white line to separate cars are the best.  As we have seen in London on the CS’s, a painted route is not sufficient.  Raised kerbs as barriers or wide shared pavements are better.6. Segregation is not always possible particularly in historic towns where roads are narrow.  Thus we must learn to get along better on roads. A period of zero tolerance policing could work but it must be accompanied by an advertising campaign that ensures everybody knows it is happening and the offer of free cycle/driver awareness training for all. With many people cycling to save money, requiring extra insurance for cyclists is a step too far and would discourage thousands.7. I would urge the government to take action immediately.  If we want cycling to be a major form of commuter transport, things are only going to get worse.&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;