

[[[Written evidence submitted by Citizens Advice (JRR 0005)]]]&#xa0;Introduction&#xa0;The Citizens Advice service provides free, independent, confidential and impartial advice to everyone on their rights and responsibilities. It values diversity, promotes equality and challenges discrimination. &#xa0;The service aims to: &#xa0;&#xa0;The Citizens Advice service is a network of 338 independent advice centres that provide free, impartial advice from more than 3,300 locations in England and Wales, including GPs’ surgeries, hospitals, community centres, county courts and magistrates courts, and mobile services both in rural areas and to serve particular dispersed groups. Over 30 local Citizens Advice Bureaux act as civil legal aid suppliers mainly for housing law issues.Like many organisations we are having to adapt to the impact of the recent Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (LASPO) which has nearly halved the provision of civil legal aid services.  The cuts to legal aid have has put a great strain on our service as we have lost considerable specialist casework capacity in social welfare law and around 150 legal aid contracts as a result of recent scope changes. This has led to significant human rights concerns with many of our clients being denied access to justice because they can’t afford legal representation and Citizens Advice struggles to provide the support they need.General comments&#xa0;Judicial review is an important check on the exercise of power by public authorities and a means to ensure their decisions are lawful. The Government’s proposals will significantly restrict access to judicial reviews, preventing people from using a vital tool to protect their basic human rights when public bodies act unlawfully or exceed their legal powers. &#xa0;Judicial review helps test the compatibility of public decision making with rights under European Community Law and the Human Rights Act which enacted the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) into UK legislation.  Having the backstop of judicial review may be the only means of appeal from an internal complaints system which is not itself compliant with the ECHR, for example because it does not qualify as an ‘independent and impartial tribunal’.&#xa0;The Government proposals not only target weak judicial review cases but would also prevent many strong cases from progressing, restricting access to justice and making it more difficult for people to protect their human rights.  &#xa0;Citizens Advice believes the Government proposals will have a negative impact on access to justice, with implications for compliance with Article 6 of the ECHR and also access to justice for those who have experienced breaches of other articles of the ECHR. The proposals could also have an impact on the ability of individuals to bring judicial reviews based wholly or partly on alleged breaches of the public sector equality duty (PSED) under the Equality Act 2010.&#xa0;Even unsuccessful judicial review cases have an impact. Awareness that decisions may be challenged by judicial review helps ensure decision-making is careful, fair and reasonable. Very few people can take the risk of bringing a claim for judicial review without the help of legal aid so it is publicly funded judicial review claims that provide the necessary rigour to public decision making.&#xa0;Standing&#xa0;Judicial reviews brought by non government organisations (NGOs), charities, pressure groups and faith organisations are relatively successful compared to other types of judicial review, so clearly these successful cases are not simply publicity stunts. If a case has no merit and is proposed purely to get a press release under the current system, it would not get any legal aid funding and the Government would not have to spend any taxpayers’ money defending it. The Government’s proposals will make no difference to the ability of campaigning organisations to put out press releases but would stop one of the most successful types of judicial review.&#xa0;In addition, we feel strongly that the lawfulness of public administration is the legitimate concern of the whole of society. The purpose of judicial review is to address matters of public interest, not redress private wrongs. We believe any change to the rules on standing would distort the focus of judicial review, which is and should continue to be publicly minded and forward looking.&#xa0;Many challenges brought in the public interest, regarding serious human rights issues, could not otherwise be brought by a claimant with a direct interest in the matter. In some cases those affected by a policy or decision cannot bring a case themselves. As such there will be situations when the intervention of an organisation with a concern about a particular issue will be the only means to challenge unlawful practices. One example of this is where a Government policy is unlawful but has yet to impact on individuals. Another example is where the affected person is in no position to bring a judicial review, for instance, where they have been deported unlawfully. Challenge from an organisation can also be necessary where a defendant decides to settle cases with multiple individuals rather than cease the unlawful activities which affect many more. It will be detrimental to the rule of law to close off this avenue of challenge.&#xa0;In addition, many NGOs and charities are often ideally placed to represent the interests of an affected group, can support their claim with specialist evidence and their presence lends an institutional overview to the issue. NGOs can also be well placed to judge which matters raise points of significant public importance, NGOs are able to observe patterns of repeated unlawfulness which collectively can be of great importance. It can also be more efficient for the court than dealing with a large number of individual cases. &#xa0;Where a policy is being applied in a detrimental way to a large number of people, it may take the intervention of an organisation to challenge the practice and if necessary take judicial review proceedings. Such action would be taken as a last resort but could be the only means to challenge the widespread impact of potentially unlawful activities.&#xa0;A CAB in London saw a woman who, with her husband, had made a claim for jobseekers allowance. When her husband subsequently started working, they immediately informed the Jobcentre and provided payslips as soon as they were issued. Despite this, the DWP decided to recover the overpayment of benefit and impose a civil penalty on the mistaken grounds that they had failed to disclose a material fact. The couple were deeply unsettled by having a large debt which had arisen due to the Jobcentre’s failure to act on the information they provided. The civil penalty appeared to have been imposed without looking at all the evidence relating to the JSA claim. The bureau believed that, if the application of civil penalties in this way was found to be a blanket policy, judicial review proceedings could be appropriate.&#xa0;The constitutional role of charities, NGOs and other organisations in bringing judicial review in the public interest is emphasized in case law.&#xa0;The importance of setting the threshold for judicial review at a reasonable level was commented on in R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p Bulger [2001] EWHC Admin 119 at 20 ‘ the threshold for standing in judicial review has generally been set by the courts at a low level.  This…is because of the importance in public law that someone should be able to call decision makers to account’. 

[[[&#xa0;]]]This is a particular issue where a regulator, for example, makes a decision which affects both individuals and businesses. On their own, and without the support of third party organisations, individuals are unlikely to have the resources to take judicial review proceedings against a decision, whereas businesses with a contrary interest are more likely to use their resources to bring in specialist legal teams, such as the British Bankers Association (BBA) v Financial Services Authority and Financial Ombudsman Service [2011] EWHC 999 which sought to challenge the FSA’s policy statement on PPI and the FOS online resource which helped consumers make complaints about mis-sold PPI. While the judgment in this case was beneficial for consumers, there is a risk that existing inequalities of power and resources could be exacerbated by the Government’s proposals with individuals losing any power or opportunity to challenge public decision making.&#xa0;Interveners&#xa0;The Government’s proposals to discourage organisations from intervening in cases, by imposing additional cost burdens on interveners, fail to recognise the public focus of judicial review. Where there are important matters of public policy, which may go beyond the particular interests of those involved in the claim, interveners have particular expertise that contributes to a case and interventions can assist the court and improve the quality of decision making.  Government departments also intervene in cases themselves. &#xa0;There is no evidence that interventions generally add much, if anything, to the overall costs of a case and courts already have wide discretion as to the terms on which they allow interventions. Discouraging interveners by increasing the cost risk associated with intervening will discourage their participation and reduce the overall quality of judgments.  &#xa0;Costs&#xa0;We believe the Government’s proposals on costs would prevent many strong cases from ever being heard, limiting access to justice. This would cause significant injustices and do nothing to prevent weak cases blocking up the system. The Government has failed to show any evidence that there is a problem in the first place.&#xa0;The difference between judicial review and civil litigation stems from inequality of power (most cases are brought by individuals against the state), differences in purpose (judicial review is intended to prevent abuses of power by the state) and differences in procedure (very tight timescales for bringing a claim for judicial review and no procedure under which claimants can inspect the documents held before deciding whether to proceed with a case). Therefore special costs rules are needed to protect claimants from potential financial ruin if a case is lost.

[[[&#xa0;]]]Limiting protective costs orders (PCOs) will prevent organisations acting in the public interest from accessing the courts.

[[[ ]]]Insufficient evidence has been provided as to the scale of alleged detriment. Increasing the costs risk for claimants and legal representatives by restricting legal aid in cases where permission to apply for judicial review is not granted will prevent meritorious cases from being pursued and will allow unfair, unlawful and unreasonable public decision making.&#xa0;The proposals on standing combined with the proposals on PCOs risk creating a catch 22 situation where organisations that are able to show standing would be barred automatically from a PCO. PCOs are made where the proposed litigation is in the public interest. Individuals will be deterred from taking these important cases due to the risk of adverse costs, despite the public good that could stem from the action.&#xa0;Even when such cases are lost, there is often benefit to the development of law by clarifying points. These cases can also confer benefit to public authorities by confirming the legality of their actions, helping to establish clearer guidance for good public administration.&#xa0;The test proposed allows for no balancing of private interest and public benefit. Private interest can be slight but public benefit can be overwhelming. Lack of cost protection which deterred individuals from taking a case would have a detrimental impact on the wider public.&#xa0;Furthermore, the current consultation, Cost protection in defamation and privacy cases: the Government’s proposals, states, ‘The rationale for introducing cost protection is to ensure that meritorious cases are able to be brought or defended by the less wealthy, who should not be deterred from bringing or defending an appropriate claim through fear of having to pay unaffordable legal costs to the other side if they lose’. We believe that there is a clear parallel to be drawn here. In defamation cases, there can often be a considerable power and financial imbalance between parties. This is also clearly the case of judicial reviews. The same deterrent to the bringing of appropriate cases will apply.&#xa0;We do not believe that the case for change to wasted costs orders has been made. The courts already have the power to penalise representatives for improper, negligent or unreasonable conduct and do so where appropriate. Wasted costs orders are not an appropriate means to deal with litigation of weak cases. Clients can and sometimes do decide to continue with a case despite the advice from their legal representatives. They may be obliged to continue with a case in such circumstances due to their professional obligations. Widening the use of wasted cost orders will have a further chilling effect on the willingness of representatives to take on cases for clients of limited financial means.Legal aid payment for pre-permission work&#xa0;Proposals to make payment for pre-permission legal aid work will reduce access to judicial review as a remedy. Providers will be forced to shoulder all the risks of taking the case despite existing processes to prevent weak cases being funded.&#xa0;The LAA already conducts a merits assessment at each stage of provision of funding, usually requiring a barrister’s opinion on prospects. We believe that this provides sufficient protection to the public purse from weak cases.&#xa0;The underpinning justification for this proposal is that the Government feels that too many weak cases are being funded, but no statistical evidence has been put forward to support this. A case may be strong but may be withdrawn before the permission stage because the public body concerned provides an acceptable remedy to the applicant. In the experience of bureaux, issuing judicial review proceedings often has the effect of escalating an issue and ensuring a public body meets its obligations when negotiation has failed to do so.&#xa0;In addition we believe that cases with significant merit will not be taken because of the unreasonable burden of risk that would be placed upon representatives. Rather than weeding out weak cases, the proposals would in effect only fund the very strongest cases, those that representatives assessed as risk free as the case would be of a type where they would be certain that permission would be granted. In effect the bar for taking a case would be so high it would arguably be a poor use of tax payers’ money to defend a case which was so clear cut.&#xa0;Many of our advisers report that it is already very difficult to find legal aid lawyers to take on a judicial review because of the recent cuts to the legal aid budget. The remaining law centres and solicitor firms are working on an incredibly tight budget. Lawyers are therefore going to stop taking on judicial review cases where there is some likelihood that they will not get paid for the work. Cases with merit, but with an element of uncertainty because, for example the law is developing or because further evidence needs to be obtained, will therefore be screened out of legal aid by representatives who simply cannot take the risk of not being paid. This will damage the development of case law and reduce the number of important test cases taken. &#xa0;We do not believe that the new proposals will give practitioners sufficient reassurance that they will be paid fairly for the work they undertake. First, it is impossible to tell in advance how the proposed LAA discretion will be applied in cases which are settled and second, practitioners will still need to risk substantial amounts on cases which are reasonably taken forward but which, for reasons outside of the control of the representative, may not progress beyond permission stage.&#xa0;The claimant’s representative, will not necessarily be in the best position to judge the merits of the case until further information is disclosed by the defendant.  In the majority of cases, it is the defendant who holds most of the crucial information with no compulsion to disclose it until forced to do so through the litigation process.&#xa0;The principle of a discretionary scheme will add yet more uncertainty to the process and will require further work by the representative to make the application for payment (which will also itself be at risk of not being paid). It will also add a significant cost burden on the state for the extra administration for the LAA to do extra assessments on which cases deserve discretionary funding.&#xa0;A discretionary scheme is unlikely to be sufficient to allay fears that clients will find it much harder to find a lawyer willing to take on their case, due to the financial uncertainty entailed in the proposal.&#xa0;One bureau reported that they have needed to find legal representation on a number of occasions to challenge a local authority’s refusal to accept their duties to the children of asylum seekers. On each occasion the case was settled at the eleventh hour, almost on the steps of the court. On at least one occasion, this happened despite the local authority having received legal advice from its own legal department to comply. These cases show that without adequate access to the courts, such practices can go unchallenged. The bureau is concerned that in future, legal representation will be significantly harder to secure, if the representative is uncertain whether they will be paid.&#xa0;Cases which clarify the way that the state should treat large numbers of citizens beyond those who took the case may not find representation in future and cases which make an overwhelming impact for a single client might not be taken on:&#xa0;A CAB in the South East reported the case of a man who sought advice after his homelessness application had been turned down by their council, despite the fact he had nowhere to live and was suffering from a serious lung condition.  Not only did the council turn down the application but they also refused to house the man while their decision was reviewed. The CAB obtained a legal aid counsel opinion that they would be able to make an application for judicial review. With the threat of this judicial review the council agreed to provide accommodation pending review. With the CAB and counsel's opinion supporting the client, the review found in his favour, that he was in need of support to avoid homelessness and there was no need for a court hearing. If the council had known that the CAB could not afford to take it further they may have been less likely to bow to pressure.&#xa0;A CAB in the North West advised a single homeless man. He had health issues and was vulnerable. The homeless section at the council had refused to take a homeless application from him and provide him with temporary accommodation while it was considered. The bureau attempted to resolve the issue without court action, but despite phone calls and a pre-action protocol letter, an agreement could not be reached. The bureau applied for legal aid on behalf of the man which enabled them to instruct counsel to prepare pleadings. Despite further calls explaining that the papers were ready to be issued at court, the council did not back down. An order was made that evening ex parte by the out of hours judge directing that he was to be given temporary accommodation. The judge's order was sent to the council who made arrangements to accommodate the client the same night, otherwise he would have been forced to sleep rough.&#xa0;Under the Government proposals, the bureau would have been at risk of not being paid for the work they carried out to ensure that the local authority accepted their duties to a vulnerable man.&#xa0;Borderline cases&#xa0;Removing legal aid for borderline cases is also a significant issue. Borderline in the context used by the LAA means around the 50 per cent potential success mark, and cases where borderline challenges are permitted currently include some public law, immigration and family claims. This means that around half of people who will no longer be able to afford to have their case heard would have won. They are often cases where the matters arising are fundamental ones, such as cases involving human rights. The very nature of a legal case is that the final outcome cannot be determined without deliberation on controversial issues. Test cases on borderline issues are often vital for shaping the development of the law and clarifying difficult questions. Removing this possibility will increase the power of public bodies and may allow undesirable practices to continue without a realistic option to challenge them.&#xa0;The Government’s proposals will inhibit access to justice without achieving the stated aims of speed and efficiency.&#xa0;Procedural as opposed to substantive defects in decisions

[[[&#xa0;]]]The Government’s proposals to change the test that the court would apply in cases where claimants challenge procedural defects fails to appreciate the important role of judicial review in upholding the standards of procedural fairness. The proposals are likely to increase the burden on both claimants and defendants engaged in judicial review proceedings and place the court in the shoes of the decision maker, a role in which it has no expertise.&#xa0;In many cases Parliament has set out clearly what procedure Government bodies must take when making a decision to ensure they act lawfully. These changes mean that judges will have to decide whether or not the failure to follow the procedures set out by Parliament would have made any difference to Government bodies’ final decision.&#xa0;Judicial review is routinely concerned with challenges to the lawfulness of procedure. In general the judicial review court has no expertise to consider the merits of a decision. If the no difference test was modified as proposed, it would involve the courts in matters it is ill-equipped to adjudicate on, adding to costs and requiring additional court time&#xa0;Permission hearings are shorter hearings where the evidence is not considered in depth. ‘No difference’ arguments heard later in the process often rely on extensive evidence. The Government proposals would increase the complexity of the permission stage by requiring more lengthy pleadings and it appears most likely that more cases will need to be dealt with at an oral hearing. This would result in increased delays at this stage in the process and potentially increase the cost to tax payers.&#xa0;In addition, bringing forward ‘no difference’ arguments to the permission stage is likely to further disadvantage litigants in person (LIPs) who are often only able to secure (mostly pro bono) representation after the permission stage. Bringing forward such complex issues will make it harder for a LIP to progress a meritorious case. The Royal Courts of Justice Citizens Advice Bureau have identified that, of their client group of LIPs, 25 per cent have a protected characteristic. This suggests that the proposal would raise equality issues and therefore has human rights implications. We do not believe this proposal is consistent with the UK’s duties under the ECHR.&#xa0;Coupled with proposals to restrict legal aid payments for permission work, this proposal would act as a serious disincentive for legal aid representatives when considering the risks of representation.  Not only would further work be required at this early stage, which would be done at risk of non-payment, but the proposals would also introduce further uncertainty. Given the low levels of legal aid funding, we doubt whether many organisations with legal aid funding will be able to do the initial work when there is a significant risk they will not be paid, even in a good case with a successful outcome for the client. &#xa0;The public sector equality duty

[[[&#xa0;]]]Citizens Advice is a strong supporter of making the public sector equality duty (PSED) an essential tool of modern government. The PSED helps to ensure that the needs of different people are properly taken into account and balanced. The best alternative to having judicial reviews challenging the PSED duty is for the Government to make sure these issues are considered properly in the first place. &#xa0;The objective behind the PSED is to ensure that consideration of equality forms part of the day-to-day decision-making and operational delivery of public bodies. This is as vital now as ever, given that all public authorities are having to make difficult decisions about how to prioritise their scarce resources. From our experience it is clear that is not happening, which is why judicial review is needed on PSED issues. We also believe that the rights protected by the PSED are of such importance that judicial review should be retained as the remedy for any breaches. Judicial review can achieve far reaching improvements for large numbers of people who might otherwise be subject to discrimination.&#xa0;We have considered whether there might be a viable alternative to judicial review and do not believe a workable alternative exists.&#xa0;In the case below, litigation was necessary to secure adherence to the PSED.&#xa0;A CAB in the North West pursued a complaint about a care package for a woman who was bedbound and needed a hoist to get out of bed with carers attending four times a day to change her incontinence pads. She had dementia, neuropathy, incontinence and was unable to stand. Under the NHS funded care package, the primary care trust (PCT) insisted that they could only provide three pads per day, not enough in this case. The client could not meet the extra cost of additional pads. The bureau advised that the care package should meet the cost of however many pads were required and complaint on the woman’s behalf, but the NHS claimed they were following their own policy to only allow three pads per day. After further advocacy by the bureau, the NHS incontinence team re-assessed the client and agreed to allow four pads. Although the client received a positive outcome to her individual case, the NHS would not amend their policy so that others need not face the same or similar disadvantage and barriers to getting their basic human needs met. The bureau threatened judicial review, which cited amongst other legal provisions the PSED. Following litigation in 2012 the NHS changed the policy so that everyone will now be assessed on their own individual needs.&#xa0;The combined effect of legal aid proposals

[[[&#xa0;]]]Previous changes to legal aid have had the effect of reducing the advice and support available to individuals. Social welfare law raises complex legal issues and problems are often extremely serious to users of the justice system. Limiting the scope of issues with which legal aid funded advisers can help means they are not able to solve people’s problems fully, as many clients experience multiple problems across different civil justice and social welfare scope areas.&#xa0;Reductions in legal aid have meant that many people have been unable to access the specialist support they need. Limiting the availability of legal aid for judicial review will seriously restrict availability of judicial review as a means of challenge for many people, leaving them powerless to challenge public decisions that have a material effect on their lives.&#xa0;November 2013               &#xa0;