&#xa0;

[[[Written submission ]]]

[[[from]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[Henk]]]

[[[ van ]]]

[[[Klaveren]]]

[[[ (CYS0035)]]]&#xa0;

[[[1 Overview]]]&#xa0;1.1 This submission to the Transport Select Committee has been submitted by Henk van Klaveren, in a personal capacity, and draws upon my experience as a cyclist and driver in both the UK and the Netherlands.&#xa0;1.2 In this submission, I argue that cycling in UK cities is not safe enough and that much can and needs to be done to improve this to encourage cycling among people of all abilities and age groups. I make a number of recommendations to achieve this, the principle of which are to stop focusing on short-term solutions that tackle the symptoms of underlying infrastructure failings as well as to see how the Dutch model of Sustainable Safety can be gradually introduced into the UK.&#xa0;

[[[2 ]]]

[[[Author’s background]]]&#xa0;2.1 Like most Dutch people, I have cycled from a young age onwards, cycling daily to secondary school for example. I moved to the UK to study in Glasgow and continued to commute by bike on a daily basis and still do so since moving to London for study in 2008. I commute daily to and from work and have cycled in central London, as well as many boroughs to the south, east and north of central London. I see cycling as a mode of transport to get from A to B like any other, and do not cycle recreationally. I cycle on traditional Dutch single-speed bike with pedal-backwards braking, which I inherited from my grandfather when I started to cycle to secondary school. I have also taken driving lessons and tests in both countries, first in the UK and then during one of my university summer holidays in the Netherlands where I passed my driving test.&#xa0;2.2 My interest in road safety and the public policy behind it has primarily been informed by the sharp contrast I found between cycling in the UK and in the Netherlands. As I worked in Parliament for nearly four years after graduating, I have explored the public policy framework behind road safety in both countries in my spare time but informed by the political knowledge gained in my roles in Westminster.&#xa0;

[[[3 Is cycling safe in the UK?]]]&#xa0;3.1 There are two parts to this question the Committee has asked to hear views on. On the one hand, there are the road statistics and on the other hand the subjective safety that cyclists experience on the road. My answer to both those questions would be that the UK is not safe enough.&#xa0;3.2 As a Committee, you will hear a large number of people give you evidence on the statistical side. I am most persuaded by the accidents per a certain number of kilometres ridden statistics and on that basis, the Netherlands is three times as safe as the UK. In Holland, there are 1.1 cycle deaths per 100m kilometres cycled, whereas the UK has 3.6 fatalities per 100m kilometres ridden. This is in spite of the fact that far more people cycle in the Netherlands, as Roelof Wittink,&#xa0;Executive Director of the Dutch Cycling Embassy, pointed out in 2012.&#xa0;3.3. The subjective or relative safety of cyclists is based on the perception of a cyclist. On that basis, I feel far less safe on UK roads than I do on Dutch roads. This perception of relative safety is based on the proximity to fast-moving vehicles, on unclear and dangerous junctions I have to share with large vehicles and the fact that the cycling infrastructure that has been put in place is woeful. As a consequence, I am much more on my guard when I cycle in the UK than when I cycle in the Netherlands and always feel that at any moment I could be hit by a vehicle whose driver has not behaved appropriately around a cyclist on the road or because they have failed to observe basic road safety practices, such as checking their blind spot before turning a corner. Drivers of all vehicles, including cyclists, are generally, in my perception, more impatient, less tolerant of others and their mistakes – especially drivers of cyclists – and less aware of nor willing to take into account the limitations and abilities of other road users.&#xa0;

[[[4 What could and should central and local Government do to improve]]]

[[[ cycling safety?]]]&#xa0;4.1 Both in the Netherlands and in the UK, road users make mistakes or wilfully ignore traffic rules. This is a given and this will not change materially, unless enforcement is dramatically and permanently scaled up. This is undesirable for a number of reasons, not least financial in these difficult times. The role of Government should therefore be to seek to limit the possibilities for rule-breaking, knowingly or otherwise, and to seek to limit the consequences of rule-breaking, by ensuring the scope for accidents as a result of rule-breaking are limited.&#xa0;4.2 Secondly, the role of Government should be to be to improve overall road safety. That will manifest itself primarily as improved cycling safety, as the roads in the UK are currently designed to accommodate motorised traffic, but it need not be limited to this.&#xa0;4.3 Any measures to improve road safety should go beyond mitigating the symptoms of an infrastructure that is fundamentally designed to accommodate motorised traffic. For example, HGV turning alarms do not tackle the underlying failure of the road design that sees a vulnerable user and a powerful user share the same space. They merely try to alleviate the symptoms of this situation rather than asking searching questions as to how such confrontations between road users with such a huge disparity in mass and speed could be allowed to take place in the first instance. In this context, it is important to note that cycling safety has been improved in the Netherlands in the last few decades without resorting to such pointless devices as HGV turning alarms.&#xa0;4.4. The safety of cyclists in the Netherlands did not come about naturally: clear and unambiguous long-term policy decisions were taken from the 1970s road safety campaigns onwards to achieve it. The Netherlands is a road safety laboratory: many measures have been tried, those that were successful were kept and spread across the country after they proved to be successful but often without central Government mandating specific measures over others. This fits with the highly devolved structure of government in the Netherlands, where provincial and municipal authorities have much flexibility in how they achieve commons goals. This could be adapted to the more centralised UK environment and perhaps be a further encouragement to the Coalition Government’s stated policy objective of localism. Furthermore, the roads in the UK and the Netherlands were not very different before measures to improve cycling safety were taken: the car dominated and the bike had been in steady decline since the 1950s. A densely populated country, space is limited and Dutch roads are not exempt from the need for a compact built environment. They are perceived to be wider and more open than UK roads, in my experience this is only because of the design encapsulated in the model of Sustainable Safety, not because they are very different to begin with.&#xa0;4.5 Sustainable Safety4.5.1 In the 1990s, the concept of Sustainable Safety was developed in the Netherlands to take road safety measures to the next level. The third National Multiannual Road Safety Programme first mentioned the concept in 1991 and in 1997 an agreement on sustainable safety was signed by all levels of government (national, provincial, municipal, water boards and city regions). It has an overall aim of creating a system in which “it cannot go wrong” by preventing serious accidents and where that’s not possible, to eliminate the chance of serious injury. To achieve this in practice, it gets away from a reactive approach to road safety towards a proactive and integrated approach, set out in five pillars that inform infrastructure policy. The Institute for Road Safety Research (SWOV) was instrumental in the development of Sustainable Safety and continues to advance research to develop the model further.&#xa0;4.5.2 The first principle is focused on the functionality of roads, which then informs the design of the road as set out in the third principle. It divides up roads into three different categories based on one main function: - through roads, designed to allow travel by vehicles at high velocity from A to B; - access roads, designed to provide access to destinations where faster traffic mixes with slower traffic (cyclists, pedestrians). As residence is the main function in these areas, motorized traffic are guests.- distributor roads that connect the two previous categoriesThis division of road categories is combined with traffic plans that municipalities in the Netherlands have had to design since the 1970s. This forces local government to create an overarching vision of how traffic should be directed in their area and from that flows the design of roads that are appropriate for their function.&#xa0;4.5.2.1 In the UK, there is a notional difference between the different roads but as a road user, it is often difficult to see the difference in built-up areas. For example, there can be through roads that pass through high streets where a large number of pedestrians and cyclists move at slower speeds.&#xa0;4.5.3 The second principle of homogeneity informs the design of the different road categories. The background to this principle is to reduce the risk of serious injury and to create a sense of subjective safety. This achieved by ensuring that where road users with large mass differences use the same traffic space (e.g. on access roads), the speed of all traffic should be so low that the most vulnerable road users come out of a crash without severe injuries. Rather than giving the driver a choice to lower speeds, the ideal situation is one where the lowering of speed is achieved through the road infrastructure. Where traffic uses high speeds (e.g. through roads or distributor roads), different types of road user and road users driving in different directions should be physically separated from each other as much as possible. This prevents severe injury if things go wrong.&#xa0;4.5.3.1 To put this in a UK context, virtually all roads where vehicles use high speeds and have a large mass differential currently share the road with the most vulnerable users, namely cyclists. This is a significant risk that falls solely on the most vulnerable users as they will sustain the most severe injuries in case of an accident. The worst possible sections of road in the UK are the combined bus and cycle lanes: these force the most vulnerable users to share a road closely with some of the largest vehicles on the road. Another example is the Advanced Stop Line that are increasingly used: this puts vulnerable road users directly in front of the least vulnerable road users and is a recipe for conflict between the two. Only on quiet access roads can they perform the function that ASLs are being given in the UK on the busiest roads.&#xa0;4.5.3.2 The principle of homogeneity is the most important part of Sustainable Safety. It requires segregated cycle lanes to be introduced and where that’s not possible to reduce traffic speeds through infrastructure arrangements. Long-term road safety is not possible unless the risk of serious is reduced and that is only possible by designing the roads with its most vulnerable users in mind, both pedestrians and cyclists.&#xa0;4.5.4 The third principle is predictably. This is aimed at preventing unsafe actions, by ensuring that road users know what is expected of them and what to expect of others. To achieve the predictability of road design, both continuity and consistency are key. &#xa0;4.5.4.1 For example, in the Netherlands most access roads will have cobbled or herring-bone bricks as the road surface. Cars are parked on or close to the road and cyclist are sharing the road with cars. This is a strong indicator for drivers that they need to lower their speeds and need to be more aware of cyclists and pedestrians. If they drive too fast, the road surface will create a lot of noise in the car signalling to the driver that they are going too fast. Distributor roads are wider, with no parked cars on the road and cyclists are clearly separated and cannot unexpectedly come onto the road. &#xa0;4.5.4.2 In the UK, most roads look alike. Cars can be parked on through roads (e.g. Waterloo Bridge) in much the same way that they will be parked in a more residential area. Bus lanes come and go unpredictably and their operating times can vary significantly on a short stretch of road. Roads can unexpectedly move from two- or three-lane roads to single lane roads in built-up areas and vice versa. This can happen across a junction, for example, easily leading to congestion on the junction as people adapt to the unexpected situation ahead. Cyclists are on all roads, sometimes in ad hoc cycle lanes that start and stop unpredictably and in which cars can often park and buses have their stops – forcing cyclists into the faster traffic moving alongside them. This creates uncertainty and unexpected movements when drivers think the roads should belong to them. This can all lead to dangerous situations as drivers adapt or not to things they did not expect were coming their way.&#xa0;4.5.5 The fourth principle is forgiveness. We all make mistakes as we use the roads, whether intentional or not. The key thing is to ensure that the mistakes we inevitably make do not lead to serious accidents. This is both a social forgiveness, namely the willingness of drivers to anticipate a potentially unsafe action of another road users and adapting their behaviour in advance, as well as physical forgiveness. The latter can mean fewer obstacles next to a road so that cars cannot crash into them or the segregated cycle lanes at junctions that are set back slightly from the main junction so that as cars turn, they have the chance to correct for cyclists they failed or could not see in their blind spot check before turning. Instead of immediately hitting a cyclist, they turn and as they approach the cycle lane crossing the road, both the cyclist and the driver (who through the turn starts to see the cycle lane through their front window) can take corrective action.&#xa0;4.5.6 This willingness to anticipate and adapt road behaviour as described above is supported by intensive efforts to create state awareness, the fifth principle. This entails that road users are aware of their own limitations and strengths. This can be both personal, e.g. awareness of reduced response times when tired, as well as of their vehicle, e.g. the size of a blind spot. It also means knowing that other road users may not see or behave in the way we expect them to, e.g. children playing who run out into the street, and thus allowing us to practice social forgiveness. This is supported by clear predictability of roads so that drivers are better aware of what they can expect from other road users in a given situation. It is further supported by education, e.g. cycling awareness training in Dutch primary schools or the emphasis on double-checking a car’s blind spot before turning a corner in Dutch driving lessons (the UK guide of Mirror-Signal-Manoeuvre has become Mirror-Blind Spot-Signal-Blind Spot-Manoeuvre in the Netherlands).&#xa0;4.6 The model of Sustainable Safety is one of the bedrocks of Dutch road safety policies but it is not the only one. It goes too far in this submission to consider other measures as well, such as measures aimed at reducing traffic in city centres and encouraging the take-up of alternative means of transport such as cycling to reduce congestion and improve the built environment more generally.&#xa0;

[[[5 Recommendations]]]&#xa0;5.1 The UK needs to radically overhaul how it approaches cycling safety. An integral and comprehensive approach like Sustainable Safety should be developed, supported by research. Much work has already been done that the UK can draw on and SWOV has a number of useful factsheets on its website for an English-language audience.&#xa0;5.2 I have outlined the principles of Sustainable Safety because they were the continuation of a radical change in road safety policy that started in the 1970s in the Netherlands. They are one of the most sophisticated models of road safety in the world and can be easily adapted to local circumstances. After all, the underlying principles do not prescribe specific measures but outline a vision on which road infrastructure design should be based.&#xa0;5.2 With the vision of Sustainable Safety in mind, it is clear that the UK currently focuses too much on the reactive policies, addressing the symptoms of fundamental problems only, rather than taking preventive and proactive measures. An example would be the emphasis on HGV turning alarms rather than focusing efforts on how to separate the cyclist and the HGV in a way that prevents the collisions the alarms seek to reduce from being possible in the first place.&#xa0;5.3 The Transport Select Committee should consider recommending to all levels of Government that a similar agreement to Sustainable Safety is reached in the UK. This agreement should contain measures to separate traffic flows as much as possible and reduce speeds where that is not possible as well as measure to increase state awareness among UK drivers through an overhaul of driving test. This test should, in future, focus less on the precise operation of a vehicle (e.g. not hitting the curb during a three-point-turn) but more on overall safe participation in traffic and awareness of the limitations of other users, most notably cyclists.&#xa0;5.4 The Transport Select Committee should make clear that this should not involve a big-bang introduction where everything is suddenly put right. The overhaul of the UK road network to make it fit for purpose requires action over the long-term in small steps. Focus should be on the busiest junctions in the busiest towns initially and then every time a road is resurfaced, for example, is an opportunity to introduce a little bit of the principles of Sustainable Safety on the UK roads. Short-term measures should focus on bridging that period rather than being seen as the solution.&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;