&#xa0;My submission comprises many opinions and observations that I have accumulated over a period of some twenty years as a Cycling Advocate, based on my own experiences and ideas: The effect on Riding Styles by the types of Bicycle employed. The attitudes and competence of Highways Staff in dealing with Cycling Infrastructure matters. Possible effects of legislation not directly affecting Cycling and Cyclists. Perceived Police attitudes to enforcement of Traffic Law. HGVs and Superhighways. I have also appended an e-mail Letter to a member of local Highways Staff, which helps to illustrate many of the points in my main submission, particularly the difficulty in dealing with Engineers who have never undergone training in Cycling Infrastructure Principles.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[We would like to hear views on:]]]Whether cycling is safe, particularly in Towns and CitiesIt is my view that Cycling in UK is not as safe as it could be, for the following reasons:1) Essentially, Cycling in UK is regarded culturally as a young person’s pursuit.  It is not considered an activity that could be followed throughout most of life.  Anyone who rides in later life, using the Bike as a viable alternative means of Transport, is deemed to be a ‘peasant’ or eccentric in some way.  Consequently, Riders are not afforded the respect to which they are entitled on the public roads.2) The situation outlined above is compounded by the types of Bicycles generally available in UK.  These tend to comprise the ubiquitous ‘Mountain Bike’ or ‘Hybrid’ derivatives, which are poorly-equipped and not user-friendly.  The lightweight ‘bare-bones’ machines used by many younger riders can engender an aggressive riding-style that I suspect contributes to many of the problems currently manifest.  In City situations, Riders are often seen in heavy traffic without lights (a legal requirement) and without reflective apparel. Compare this with the fully-equipped user-friendly Bicycles commonly used in The Netherlands and other neighbouring European Countries.  Because the Chain and gears are enclosed, these Bikes can accommodate ‘normal’ attire without fear of soiling, and for Ladies with longer skirts or overcoats, a coat/skirt guard is included.  There are fitted lights — so there is no temptation to travel without them after dark — and enclosed brakes.  Reflective tyrewalls (compulsory in The Netherlands &amp; some other Countries) enhance visibility in busy City streets.The more upright riding position positively discourages aggressive riding, although the Bikes can nip along smartly if necessary.  It is also easier for the Rider to see and be seen.(From my own experience, I can vouch for the low-maintenance qualities of machines of this sort; they even keep themselves relatively clean.  Moreover, the apparent success of the Inner London Barclay’s Hire Bike scheme would seem to support my argument that, once they have been given the opportunity to sample a Bike of this kind, Riders are happy to accept it.)3) In many Continental Countries, there is perceived to be a greater awareness of Cyclists.  One reason could be the ‘presumption of blame/liability’ traffic laws in some locations.   4) Much of the supposed ‘Cycle Facility’ infrastructure is counter-productive and thoroughly useless.  The notorious Bow Flyover Roundabout in East London is a good example.&#xa0;What central and local Government could do to improve cycling safety. Ideas could include better training and advice for Drivers and Cyclists, better enforcement of the law applying to Drivers and Cyclists, and better vehicle and road infrastructure.I have certain views as to how this could be addressed:1) After some twenty years of Cycle Advocacy and accredited representation of Cyclist’s interests, it has long been my contention that the great majority of local (and regional) Authority Engineers, Transport Planners and Consultants have insufficient training or expertise in the design and implementation of Cycling Infrastructure; instead all they are doing is ‘floundering around’ and making things up as they go along.  As a consummate example, I cite the Bow Flyover Roundabout again — which featured a fundamental blunder in running a ‘Superhighway’ Lane across the exit from the Roundabout, despite warnings of the likely consequences.To reinforce my concern, in April 2011, I participated in a Conference at South Bank University: “Policies and Practice for Promoting Pedalling.”  When I took the opportunity to raise the aforementioned points, the Organisers empathised — to the extent that they had staged a series of Workshops to address the problems encountered, but were obliged to discontinue them through lack of interest!One reason could be the supercilious attitude that Staff tend to adopt, which I would characterise as: 

[[[“this is our Department; we know best . . . we don’t need anyone else interfering on (what they regard ]]]

[[[as) ‘our patch!’” ]]] In other words, once they are qualified as Highway Engineers etc. they think that there is nothing more for them to learn.By way of an instance, an Advisory Lane of only 1.2m width was recently instated, placed immediately alongside parked Cars, on A1112 Rainham Road in Barking &amp; Dagenham Borough.  I understand that the work was funded by Transport for London as part of London 2012 Olympic works, intended to enhance safety on a route to an Athletes’ Training Ground!  I am sure that Members would agree that it is anything but a ‘safe’ route, with Riders being channelled into (what has become known as) the ‘Door Zone.’  Furthermore, if a Cyclist wisely rides outside the Lane, he or she is likely to be subjected to abuse from Motor Drivers.(Within a few days, an image should be available here: www.london21.org/uploads/A1112_Advisory_Lane_obscured.jpg) .2) As well as the aforementioned presumption of blame/liability, another initiative that I believe would have radical effect on Driver attitude and behaviour would be (what we call) ‘graduated’ Driver Licensing whereby, for those wishing to obtain a Driver Licence, it would be necessary first to obtain Cycle Proficiency — by means of an advanced adult-oriented practical examination — before obtaining a provisional Motorcycle Licence, then passing a powered two-wheeler Test before gaining a provisional private Car Licence.  At a stroke, as well as ensuring that prospective Drivers would be obliged to at least sample Cycling, this would:• Guarantee that all road users could experience what it was like to be vulnerable.  • In turn, very likely produce better, more empathetic Drivers all round.  • Ensure, for the most part, that every potential Driver would own a Bicycle.• Address the question of better Training for Cycle-users.Moreover, for some journeys, many would find that modes of transport other than the private Car were preferable.  There would, of course, be scope for exceptions, i.e. for those suffering disabilities or having achieved advanced years.  Historically, economic circumstances tended to take care of this for a large proportion of the travelling public, i.e. it would not have been feasible for most working folk to buy a motor vehicle before many years of employment and saving.  3) Certainly, better enforcement of existing traffic laws would be advantageous, but Police attitudes are highly suspect.  Some years ago, I suffered a collision with a Motor Vehicle in what, I am resolute, was a clear-cut case of careless — if not borderline dangerous — driving.  My Bicycle was struck ‘amidships’ by a Minicab emerging from a side road intersection.  In the common parlance, I was ‘T-boned:’ my left pedal broke his registration plate!  I shall resist describing all the details, but the salient point is that the Police took no action, and even entered into deceit by claiming that my accident report had been ‘lost.’  However, when I asked my MP to intervene, they changed their tune, suggesting a ‘misunderstanding’ and took the line that, as I was not badly hurt, and my Bike wasn’t excessively damaged, there was no reason to proceed.  (In complete contrast, my Insurance claim was settled by return of post!)At present, once a Car has been made legally ready for the road, it makes financial sense to use it as much as possible.  The Motor Taxation regime should be modified so that there would be minimal cost to leaving a Car parked or kept at home, but much more to drive it.  In other words, the burden should be transferred from the static to the dynamic element.  This should involve all costs, including the bulk of the insurance premium.  Once a formal registration had taken place, basic third-party insurance should be added to fuel costs.  (This would also help to obviate the common and increasing problem of uninsured Drivers.)  If a Driver desired to arrange additional insurance, he/she would be free to do so.The Vehicle Excise Duty should be transferred on to the Fuel Tax, and the Disc displayed in the Vehicle Window would instead reflect Registration and Roadworthiness Certification (MoT Test.)  To discourage fraud, the shape of the Disc should be altered periodically and a duplicate required for the rear Window of the Vehicle.  Apart from other considerations, this would make a false or out-of-date Disc easier for Police to spot in moving traffic.4) On the question of better infrastructure, all Traffic-calming measures such as Road Humps, Raised Tables and Speed Cushions etc. should be made Cycle-friendly by providing sinusoidal ramp profiles on the entry and exit slopes.  Poorly-designed infrastructure can be a discouragement to Cycle-users.&#xa0;Whether it would be desirable and feasible to segregate cyclists from other road users, including, for example, by prohibiting HGVs from entering city centres at peak hours.1) Although full segregation is often used in advanced Cycling Countries like The Netherlands, it has to be borne in mind that few urban Streets in UK could accommodate this principle.  Furthermore, I fear that it would set a precedent in the minds of many Drivers of Motor Vehicles, who would then resent any incursion on other roads.  Instead, I would like to see Drivers educated to the fact that Cycle-users have equal rights (and responsibilities) on the roads to motorised modes.  Sometimes, on narrow Carriageways, this shall result in the Bicycle governing the speed of the Traffic, if it is not safe for motor vehicles to pass.I have seen a Report cited which found that accident rates on dedicated Cycle-Paths (presumably Bike to Bike) were higher than those on normal carriageways.  I cannot comment on the severity of those accidents.2) Similarly, I would hesitate to restrict HGV movements . . . If they are prevented from moving during one period, their movements shall merely be concentrated into other periods.  However, it may be advantageous to restrict their speed in City centres or other sensitive areas etc.  Cycle-oriented safety equipment should be made mandatory.  Whatever recommendations are made, the fraught issue of policing is raised. &#xa0;Other ideas for improving cycling safety would also be welcomed.1) I suggest that safety on the Mayor of London’s ‘Cycle Superhighway’ initiative could be improved by adding the broken white lines, as are normally seen with Advisory Lanes, and their width maintained at 2 metres regardless of the carriageway width.2) As well as undergoing proper training, all Highway Engineers and Transport Planners should be able to ride Bicycles.  (This may offend against equalities and/or disability legislation.)  I have been obliged to deal with Staff who have never ridden a Bike, yet they are charged with designing facilities and infrastructure for Cycle-users to utilise.I trust that my comments and observations may be useful to the Members and assist informed discussion.I look forward to your acknowledgement in due course.&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;There follows a copy of a recent Letter to a member of local Highways Staff, illustrating and reinforcing many of the points made in my main submission.  (Photos and other documents referred to are not included.)Hello, At the close of a Cycle Liaison Group Meeting earlier this year, we had an informal discussion about Cycle Advisory Lane widths, during which you asked me: “Why do you want to ride one metre from the Kerb?”  For some reason, we were interrupted and were unable to resume.There are several sound reasons; allow me to enlighten you:• There are certain fairly obvious advantages i.e. to avoid drain grilles and manhole covers, roadside debris, and surface damage that customarily occurs close to the Kerb, while obviating the need to swerve into the path of larger, faster-moving vehicles approaching from the rear.• To establish and assert a clear presence on the carriageway (in Cycle-training parlance: ‘taking the road.’)  Observations have shown that a Rider placed well away from the Kerb is commonly afforded a similar distance in clearance by passing (or attempting to pass) Vehicles, despite the absence of marked Lanes.  Conversely, a rider cowering close to the Kerb tempts Drivers to pass by a much smaller margin — invariably, far too close.  It is this conduct we are seeking to eliminate.• If on the other hand, a Rider maintains a good distance of around one metre, yet a Driver still persists in forcing a passage, as mentioned by Amandeep in his Central Romford Cycle Map, the Rider may still have sufficient space in which temporarily to manoeuvre away. • As Amanda Burton has pointed out, it is especially important for Cyclists to maintain a good distance from the kerb when approaching left intersections, particularly when there is a filter lane — such as on the southbound carriageway of Mercury Gardens at the junction with Victoria Road and in the new arrangements at Rainham Village Tesco Superstore, where a left turn from the Viking Way extension leads to the Car Park.  If a Cyclist stays too far to the left, turning Drivers may presume that he/she is also turning (i.e. into Victoria Road,) and cut across in front.• It is necessary to take account of the fact that the Bicycle is an unstable vehicle, so it is virtually impossible to steer in an ideal straight line for any duration — especially with irregular road surfaces and/or blustery wind conditions.As I have already pointed out to your Colleague, Cycle-users do not need road space to be ‘allocated’ to them.  Cyclists are already fully entitled to all the space they require; it is the responsibility of Engineering and Transport Planning Staff to ensure that this entitlement is recognised, reflected, protected and 

[[[formali]]]

[[[sed]]] in the Lane markings installed.Regarding your fatuous comment that you have to deal with all other road-users as well, did you suppose that Cycling Advocates do not fully realise and accept this?  Most of us at the Cycle Liaison Group also hold a Driving-Licence.  The salient point that you continue to miss is that 

[[[you are not being asked to take any carriageway space away from Motor Vehicles in favour of Cycles THAT THE VEHICLES ARE NOT ALREADY OBLIGED TO RELINQUISH in the normal course of events]]]. The Lane-width dimension that accurately and adequately reflects these requirements is 

[[[two metres]]] — that’s why it is clearly stated in your Design manual!  However, as I have explained to you — repeatedly, and at some length — because the Advisory Lane specification has no legal status, if necessary and it is safe to proceed (i.e when no Cycle is present,) it may be encroached in — so the 

[[[effective overall carriageway width remains undiminished]]]. Instead, what you want is to confine Cycles to as narrow a band as you can get away with at the edge of the carriageway, so that the Motor Vehicles can whizz past unimpeded: 

[[[that is approaching the situation from completely the wrong angle]]].  The Advisory Lanes are intended to inform and guide Vehicle Drivers as to how much space they should leave when passing a Cycle.  Most Drivers already afford Cycle-Riders sufficient space, but a few do not — so it is at this group that the measures are aimed.  Conversely, by continuing your misinformed habit of restricting the Lane markings to the minimum recommended width, you are helping to bring 

[[[all]]] Vehicles closer to the Cyclist — thereby making matters worse! Another excuse that you proffered was that the two-metre Lanes would be mistaken for Parking Bays or cause other confusion.  To my response that Cycle-Logos may be added to obviate any such uncertainty, you stated that Staff are limited in the Logos that can be used.  While this may be the case, it is essentially a ‘Red Herring,’ as there is no restriction on addition of Cycle Logos to Advisory Lanes: please see illustrations.At various locations throughout the Borough, there are Parking Bays demarcated with broken white lines.  They are generally two metres wide and may be encroached in when unoccupied.  Therefore, for all intents and purposes, they are directly comparable with Cycle Advisory Lanes.  The markings do not wear away prematurely, and they do not ‘lose their value’ when being encroached.  For the reasons given above, Cycle Advisory Lanes only ‘lose their value’ when they are made too narrow.  Consequently, you can see that Staff are engaging in a substantial self-contradiction in their attitudes to Cycle facilities.The photo taken in Ferry Lane, Rainham, shows my Bicycle in a 2m Disabled Parking Bay.  If you imagine a Rider on board, with a Pantechnicon passing close to the Bay, at some four times the speed, you should have no doubt of the wisdom of installing Advisory Lanes at the correct 2m width, to give beginner Riders the necessary confidence.Without any prompting, you readily accept that I have more advanced knowledge and experience relating to Cycling Issues than you.  Despite this, you seem determined to ignore all the good advice that I provide.  Moreover, if you have been engaged in these issues for some 20 years, it is surprising (to say the least) that only now are you raising this fundamental question.I am sure that, if you were being completely honest with yourself, even you would acknowledge the absurdity of Staff working on Cycling Infrastructure matters when they have no dedicated training in this specialised area of Transport Planning or Highway Engineering.Lastly, the attached item by the Journalist Kara Dolman, copied from The Evening Standard, illustrates very well the kind of Driver attitude and behaviour that you are encouraging.&#xa0;Please do not hesitate to contact me if you still require clarification of any point.RegardsDavid S Garfield&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;