

[[[Written evidence submitted by Amnesty International UK (JRR 0015)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]On 18 July 2013, the Joint Committee on Human Rights launched an inquiry into the implications for access to justice of certain of the UK government’s proposals to reform legal aid. Amnesty International submitted written evidence to the Committee on 27 September 2013 highlighting the organization’s serious concern that the proposals will deny legal aid and access to justice to vulnerable individuals. &#xa0;On 06 September 2013,

[[[ ]]]the UK government published a series of new proposals in its Consultation Paper Judicial Review: Proposals for further reform. In response to a call for further written evidence by the Joint Committee on Human Rights, this submission highlights Amnesty International’s concerns with respect to the government’s proposed changes, focussing on their implications for human rights. These submissions should be considered together with Amnesty International’s previous written evidence dated 27 September.&#xa0;&#xa0;In its consultation document, the government describes judicial review as “a critical check on the power of the state, providing an effective mechanism for challenging the decisions, acts or omissions of public bodies to ensure that they are lawful”. This is accurate. Judicial review focuses on the exercise of, and potential misuse of, executive power. As such, it crucially supports a fundamental tenet of the rule of law – that no-one is above the law - by holding the Executive accountable to the law and due process. &#xa0;Amnesty International is concerned about the effect of the proposals on the rule of law and access to justice. In particular, Amnesty International is concerned that the proposals discussed below will significantly undermine the effectiveness of the judicial review mechanism, a critical part of the system of checks on government compliance with its obligations, including human rights obligations. These concerns are further compounded by the lack of evidence presented by the government to support its proposals.&#xa0;Set out below is more detail on: (1) the lack of evidence supporting the proposals; (2) the implications of the proposed changes to standing (a) and third party interventions (b); and (3) the implications of the proposed changes to costs (specifically Protective Costs Orders).&#xa0;The areas highlighted in this evidence are those where Amnesty International is best placed to contribute to the Committee’s inquiry. Where other proposals are not dealt with in this evidence, this should not be taken as an indication that Amnesty International agrees with those proposals or considers that they do not have implications for human rights.&#xa0;&#xa0;From the outset Amnesty International would draw the Committee’s attention to the lack of evidence underpinning the proposals made in the consultation document and the fact that, where evidence is presented, it does not support the case that the government attempts to make. &#xa0;The government makes two main claims on the basis of the statistics presented: (i) that the use of judicial review has expanded massively in recent years; and (ii) that judicial review is used as a ‘campaigning tool’, where unmeritorious claims are brought by campaigning NGOs and others simply to attract publicity. The evidence presented does not support these contentions. &#xa0;The government’s figures and graphs on page 8 of the proposals are presented alongside a statement that “[t]he number of judicial review applications has more than doubled in recent years”. However, the only significant increase shown is in immigration and asylum cases, which the government recognises are soon to be redirected to the Upper Tribunal and are therefore irrelevant to the proposed reforms. The remaining, relevant cases show an almost static line, and certainly do not demonstrate the claimed proliferation of judicial review actions; which forms the main basis of these proposals.&#xa0;The government points out in its proposals that between 2007 and 2011, around 50 judicial reviews per year “appear to have been lodged by… claimants who may not have had a direct interest in the matter at hand” and expresses its concern “that the wide approach to standing… [allows] judicial review to be used to seek publicity or otherwise to hinder the process of decision-making”. However, in 2011, even excluding immigration, asylum and planning cases, these cases ‘of concern’ represented only two per cent of all judicial reviews. Furthermore, these types of cases are in reality relatively successful when compared with other judicial review claims, as the government points out. &#xa0;So the government has highlighted a type of judicial review which forms a small fraction of all judicial reviews, and which is disproportionately successful on the merits. Clearly, this does not appear to justify the government’s claimed need to seriously restrict standing on the basis of these cases’ demands on the court system. Even accepting the government’s approach of judging the value of judicial review on the success rate of cases (an approach with which Amnesty International would have reservations), the relatively successful track record of this type of judicial review would seem to lead to the opposite conclusion; that the broader test for standing should be retained as it allows more meritorious claims to be brought, increasing the ‘value for money’ of judicial review in terms of court resources.  

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;A key issue raised by the proposals concerns who ought and ought not to have “standing” to bring a claim for judicial review. The government argues that over time the test for standing in judicial review has been interpreted too widely, “allowing judicial review to be used to seek publicity or otherwise to hinder the process of proper decision-making”. The government therefore proposes restricting the test for standing so that individuals and groups without a “direct” or “direct and tangible” interest in the outcome of the proceedings do not have standing to bring judicial review claims. &#xa0;Amnesty International is concerned that the government’s proposals would unnecessarily restrict who is able to bring judicial review claims before the courts, undermining the rule of law by limiting the remedies available to hold the government to account, including for failure to comply with its human rights obligations.&#xa0;For example, the consultation paper references the case of R (on the application of Maya Evans) v Secretary of State for Defence presumably in order to highlight cases where the government thinks it is wrong that a particular person could bring a claim. However, this case is an example of precisely the kind of case which raises issues of fundamental importance to the public interest, the rule of law and human rights, namely the UK’s policy and practice in relation to the transfer of detainees to the Afghan authorities and the risk of torture and other ill-treatment those individuals would face.  Amnesty International is concerned that the restriction on standing to those who have a direct and tangible interest will prevent these kinds of cases from being heard before the courts. &#xa0;The proposals also fail to properly consider instances where there may not be individuals with a direct interest in the outcome, for example where an unlawful policy exists but has not yet affected any individuals. It is precisely this reasoning which has led the courts to develop and relax the test for standing in judicial review in the way they have; out of a concern about restrictions on access to justice. Changing the rules on standing as proposed would undermine access to justice and the rule of law. &#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]The government expresses concern that third parties who intervene in judicial review cases may over-complicate matters and unnecessarily add to costs. The government makes three main proposals in this regard: (i) to restrict the test for standing for judicial review claims to exclude these third parties; (ii) to require third party interveners to be responsible in principle for their own legal costs resulting from the intervention; and (iii) to require third party interveners to be responsible for any significant extra costs incurred by the existing parties to the claim. &#xa0;The government’s claimed concerns are unlikely to materialize in practice. It is rare that any third party intervener is awarded its legal costs, and judges have discretion to refuse to allow third party interventions where these might over-complicate matters or disproportionately add to costs. &#xa0;Further, third party NGOs and voluntary sector organizations, such as Amnesty International, do not take lightly the decision to intervene in court proceedings (whether judicial review or other proceedings). Amnesty International would only do so where: (i) there is an important legal principle at stake; and (ii) the organization is able to bring additional expertise and useful legal arguments. Joining a case as a third party requires considerable commitment in terms of resources (which are often scarce at these organizations). If an intervention were made, this would only be following detailed consideration (with the input of in-house legal experts and possibly external counsel). &#xa0;By intervening, these third parties are likely to bring added expertise, which will allow the case to be better argued and considered. Even where costs in a specific case are increased by an intervention (which is doubtful, given that the intervention is likely to result in the issues being more clearly argued and efficiently dealt with), focussing on a single case ignores the fact that a well-run case may establish a clear precedent which disposes of the need for numerous other individual cases. &#xa0;Restricting the right of these organizations to intervene would reverse the effect described above, and therefore be detrimental to the rule of law and to the effectiveness of the system of checks and balances on governmental action. &#xa0;It is also troubling that these proposals will deter third party interventions from organizations that are unable to take any additional costs risks, whereas interventions will continue to be made by those representing well-resourced interests including companies and the government itself. &#xa0;&#xa0;A Protective Costs Order (PCO) limits the costs exposure of a claimant in a public interest case. In the consultation document the government raises concern that PCOs are being granted in too wide a range of circumstances; in particular that an expanding approach to PCOs “has tipped the balance too far and now allows PCOs to be used when the claimant is bringing a judicial review for his or her own benefit”. The government also questions whether costs protection ought to continue to be available for “political” and “campaigning” judicial review claims. &#xa0;PCOs are an important tool available to the courts to “level the playing field” between the claimants and defendants in order that certain cases can be brought which are in the public interest. As such, they help to promote the rule of law by holding the Executive to account in instances where there might otherwise be no claimant willing and able to bring proceedings. Amnesty International is concerned that the proposals concerning PCOs will seriously deter these types of claim from being brought, because the financial risk in bringing such claims will be too high. &#xa0;The proposals, when read as a whole, also appear fundamentally unworkable and will result in a greater restriction on access to justice than at first appears. The government proposes to: reform the test for standing to require a “direct interest” or “direct or tangible interest”; and at the same time remove the availability of PCOs for claimants who have a “private interest”. In its proposals, the government does not specify precisely what is meant by “direct interest” or “direct and tangible interest” (and invites views on an appropriate test), but if “direct interest” and “private interest” are in effect the same test (which appears likely), then no claimant with standing to bring a judicial review would be able to benefit from a PCO. The effect will not be to limit the availability of PCOs, but to remove them entirely. This will prevent many claimants from bringing claims resulting from legitimate grievances, because the financial risk would simply be far too high.    &#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]As we have highlighted previously, the government’s proposals to reform legal aid will deny legal aid protection and access to justice to poor and vulnerable people and inhibit the ability of individuals to hold to account public bodies and officials for their actions and decisions.&#xa0;The government’s more recent proposed judicial review reforms - if implemented - would make it even more difficult to hold the government and public bodies to account. The proposals would insulate executive action from adequate judicial scrutiny, and significantly undermine checks on government compliance with its obligations, including human rights obligations.  &#xa0;Taken individually, these two sets of proposals have negative implications for the promotion and protection of human rights and the rule of law. When taken together, the combined effect of the proposals is even more severe. Amnesty International calls upon the Committee to consider this evidence and the evidence submitted by other interested parties carefully, and to use its position to persuade the government to rethink these harmful proposals.&#xa0;27 November 20136&#xa0; Ministry of Justice, Judicial Review: Proposals for further reform, paragraph 1. Ministry of Justice, Judicial Review: Proposals for further reform, paragraph 9. Ministry of Justice, Judicial Review: Proposals for further reform, paragraph 78. Ministry of Justice, Judicial Review: Proposals for further reform, paragraph 79. The total number of cases was around 2,300. If immigration, asylum and planning cases are included the figure is 0.4 per cent. See paragraph 77 of the Ministry of Justice, Judicial Review: Proposals for further reform document, “The identified cases tended to be relatively successful compared to other JR cases”. Ministry of Justice, Judicial Review: Proposals for further reform, paragraph 79. LJ Richards at paragraph 2 stated that this was a case “brought in the public interest”, which “raises issues of real substance concerning the risk to transferees”. Also of interest is the fact that the Secretary of State in this case did not pursue the objection to standing. See the Public Law Project, Judicial Review: Proposals for Further Reform¸ October 2013. The Public Law Project also highlights two examples of such cases, R (Medical Justice) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1710 and R v Gloucestershire County Council ex p Barry  [1997] UKHL 58. See for example R v HM Inspectorate of Pollution, ex p Greenpeace Ltd (No 2) [1994] 4 All ER 329, where the court granted Greenpeace standing to bring a claim for judicial review relating to authorisations for discharge of radioactive waste from a nuclear fuel processing plant. The court considered Greenpeace to be “an entirely responsible and respected body with a genuine interest in the issues raised”, and was concerned that its 2,500 supporters in the area might not otherwise have an effective means of bringing their concerns before the court. Ministry of Justice, Judicial Review: Proposals for further reform, paragraph 158. See for example reference to “personal interest” in Ministry of Justice, Judicial Review: Proposals for further reform, paragraph 74.