&#xa0;Written evidence from Dr Tabitha Tanqueray (CYS 061)&#xa0;I use a bicycle as my main form of transport in London, whether commuting to work, travelling to the West End to see a play or taking my 9-month-old and 3-year-old children to nursery in a cargo-bike. I have to be hyper-alert and mind-read other road users. I have to predict when a taxi is about to pull over immediately in front of me, or a stationary car is about to pull out into the road (manouevre, mirror, signal). However careful I am, I can’t prevent ‘close passes’ from drivers who just don’t respect a cyclist’s right to be in the road. Although 95% of drivers seem to be careful, the remaining 5% can certainly terrify and –in many cases- actually injure us.&#xa0;I work as an anaesthetic consultant, and I have experienced the pain, as part of a large team, of trying desperately to save the life of a fatally-injured cyclist. I believe that the only reason that death rates for cyclists have not climbed recently in London is that the centralisation of trauma services in 2010, under Dr Fionna Moore’s leadership, has improved survival for critically-injured Londoners1.  The injury rates for cyclists are constantly climbing. The majority of my colleagues feel unable to cycle to work, because they’re legitimately afraid of being injured. Only the eccentric risk-takers amongst us use our bikes. Children are rarely seen cycling, which helps to explain their terrifying obesity rates (27% of year 6 primary school children in my borough are obese).&#xa0;I believe that the Transport Select Committee already knows exactly the steps which could be taken to reduce injuries and deaths to cyclists. I also believe that both central and local government are lacking the vision to implement them. Our roads do not cater for cyclists. Almost every cycle lane/ advanced stop line in London has been tacked on or put in as an afterthought aiming to somehow let bicycles quietly fit in and filter around “proper” traffic.  This is not good enough, particularly on busy roads. The time has come for fully-segregated cycle lanes and junctions designed with cyclists in mind. It is obvious that countries which prioritise safe space for cycling on their roads have lower rates of injuries and deaths amongst cyclists, despite attracting a wider range of people onto their bikes. Of course, other measures such as tighter HGV controls, better road policing etc could be useful adjuncts to safety, but designing space for cycling into our roads is the number one priority.&#xa0;Please also consider the summary report2 by the All Party Parliamentary Cycling Group before you write up your conclusions. &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;