&#xa0;

[[[Submission from Clive Mitchell]]]Background:- Traditional electrical apprenticeship and 32 years in the trade.In brief.  I think that the electrical industry has become bloated with red tape and officialdom, while simultaneously being de-skilled to the point that most electrical installation work is now being done by labourers with no proper understanding of the characteristics of electricity.  Most modern electrical certificates are little more than a disclaimer of liability for the training company and employer.Part P.  Nothing more than a profitable racket.  Any homeowner should be allowed to do electrical work in their own property without having to pay for the right or be forced to employ someone who may be less skilled than they are.One of the most stunning results of the Part P disaster is that lots of electrically incompetent individuals now believe they are fully certified electricians.You also have the ridiculous situation where an industrial electrician like myself with 32 years in the electrical industry and a vast electrical/electronic knowledge to match is not allowed to do electrical work in my own house without approval, while a self employed handyman with minimal electrical knowledge is "Part P certified" and can.SJIB.  Formerly quite a credible certifying body.  I can recall how proud I was as an apprentice to receive my grade card (with no expiry/renewal date at that time).  Now it's just another organisation cashing in on short duration certificates that you have to renew regularly while also doing patronising safety tests at further expense.  Their whole grading system is now full of watered down sub-grades to pander to the new era of de-skilling industry.NICEIC.    In my personal opinion the NICEIC is a private, profit making organisation that presented itself as a standards agency and used heavy marketing to imply that only organisations it approved should be used to do electrical work.  Add the catch-22 situation that anyone applying for approval had to have been trading for 2 years (hard when you can't get work because you're not approved by them) and a requirement that you had "proper" industrial trading premises (hard when you're just starting out as self employed) and you actually have a protection racket that served large contractors by making it hard for newly formed companies to start business.  I know this because I applied for approval when I went self employed about twenty years ago and was forced to become a freelance electrican instead for those very reasons.   Of course, now they'll approve anyone who provides suitable certification (a cheque) and does one of the lucrative "instant electrician" courses.The "one competent person per company" has been shockingly abused by generic construction and facility management companies who quite literally have just one electrically competent person.  Their role appears to be to try and clean up the mess left by the incompetent persons.Meter calibration.  There is absolutely no need for test equipment to be calibrated every single year.  The requirement of certification of calibration on test certificates has turned this into yet another expensive racket.  Domestic and industrial wiring does not require military precision.  If a meter drifts by a few percent on its ohm or megohm ranges then it is still perfectly usable to get an accurate reading.  Most meters will not drift by more than one percent over their entire lifespan unless misused severely, and this could be tested by the commonly available "proving box" that simply contains two high precision resistors as reference.  An alternative to yearly calibration could be for testers to use the proving box before each set of tests and write the measured values in a designated space.This is just the tip of the iceberg.  The whole construction industry is plagued by wall after wall of red tape and short expiry date certification.  You may wish to explore the following.IPAF:-  A "driving licence" for site access equipment like cherrypickers and scissor lifts that expires every five years  (used to be three) requiring expensive renewal.  Does your car driving licence expire every five years?  No it doesn't, and I don't think you'd be thrilled if you had to resit your driving test every five years either.  Particularly when a car is infinitely more dangerous and complicated than a cherry picker.PASMA:- A scaffold building "licence" that also expires every five years and requires expensive renewal.  No licence means no work.  That's yet another racket.CSCS safety test:- An exciting multiple choice safety test that is required to gain access to construction sites.  Of course, it expires every five years and you have to pay to do it again.  It's composed of patronising safety questions along the lines of "Your mate falls from a great height onto his head and bleeds heavily." Do you:-A.  Call for medical attention.B.  Slap him repeatedly while shouting "wake up".C.  Run away.D.  Fetch him a nice hot cup of tea.(Seriously.  That's the level of many of the questions.)This is backed up by unbelievably nonsensical on-site health and safety regulations that turn even the simplest task into a chore.  And to even start on any site involves signing blanket disclaimers of liability.  Perhaps this is also largely down to the seemingly uncontrolled litigation industry that actively encouarges people to raise fatuous legal actions.Sorry.  I'll stop ranting now.  It's tough when the trade you once loved is run into the ground for profit by the tradeless.&#xa0;28 November 2013&#xa0;