

[[[Written evidence submitted by the Equality and Human Rights Commission (JRR 0032)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Introduction ]]]The Equality and Human Rights Commission (‘the Commission’) welcomes the opportunity of responding to the Joint Committee on Human Rights (JCHR) inquiry into the implications for access to justice of the Government’s proposed judicial review reforms.  Because of our statutory remit under the Equality Act 2006 and our status as a National Human Rights Institution, the focus of this inquiry is highly relevant to our work.&#xa0;The Ministry of Justice (MoJ), describes judicial review as ‘a critical check on the power of the state, providing an effective mechanism for challenging the decisions, acts or omissions of public bodies to ensure that they are lawful’.   Judicial review is the principal means of testing the compatibility of administrative decisions with rights under the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).  In relation to civil rights and obligations, where an internal complaints procedure does not qualify as an ‘independent and impartial tribunal’ under Article 6(1) of the ECHR, judicial review may provide the independent scrutiny that is required by the Convention. &#xa0;The Commission has submitted a detailed response to the MoJ consultation on the proposed judicial review reforms; this response forms the basis of our submission to the JCHR inquiry.  In summary, the Commission’s assessment of the MoJ’s proposals is that they would have a substantial adverse impact on the ability of individuals and organisations to hold the state to account, including in relation to potential human rights breaches.  They would also potentially restrict access to justice for certain cases that involve rights under the Equality Act 2010, including the public sector equality duty (PSED) under section 149 of that Act.  &#xa0;In the Commission’s assessment, the MoJ has not provided adequate evidence in support of its proposals. The number of judicial review applications (excluding immigration and asylum) has remained almost stable since 2007.   Our own experience of judicial review litigation suggests that the proposals, if implemented, will deliver limited costs savings but will run the risk of causing delays in the court process and create extra costs which outweigh the perceived benefits.  &#xa0;We note that the MoJ does not collect comprehensive information on the protected characteristics of court users generally, or specifically those involved in judicial review proceedings.  As the consultation paper acknowledges, this limits the Government’s understanding of the potential equality impacts of its proposals, including those for legal aid.  To gain better understanding of the equality impact of any judicial review reforms, we recommend that steps are taken undertake proportionate monitoring of court users by reference to relevant protected characteristics, including by drawing on existing data sources. In the Commission’s analysis, it is particularly important to monitor the equalities impact of any proposals for resolving disputes involving the PSED.  Evidence of differential experiences of the civil justice system is available from the Commission’s Measurement Framework (MF).  The MF is designed to monitor a set of indicators and measures across 11 ‘domains’, including legal security. Within this domain, Indicator 4 relates to equal protection and support for individuals with justiciable civil justice problems. Evidence within this indicator indicates differences in the advice-seeking behaviour of people who share protected characteristics when faced by civil law problems. For example, people aged 18 to 24 and those aged 75 and over; people who are Asian, Black, mixed race or Chinese; and Buddhists and Hindus are less likely than other groups to obtain advice when faced with a civil justice problem. 

[[[The test for standing ]]]The MoJ proposes introducing a more restricted test for ‘standing’, which would limit the individuals and organisations that could bring claims for judicial review.  For the reasons outlined below, the Commission does not consider that any change to the test is required.&#xa0;The Impact Assessment published alongside the MoJ consultation paper has not monetised the impacts of this proposal, merely stating that the Government is ‘concerned’ that over time the courts have given an increasingly generous interpretation of the current ‘sufficient interest’ test for standing.    &#xa0;The Commission regularly monitors judicial review claims involving equality and/or human rights issues and has extensive experience of intervening in such claims. We are not aware of claims being allowed to proceed where the claimant has had little or no interest in the matter or where judicial review is being used as a mere campaigning tool, beyond what is reasonably the concern of an interested party.&#xa0;In our assessment, the current standing test is fit for purpose, and a narrower test may have a negative impact on pre-hearing costs and on court time. The existing rules have been set out clearly by the courts and these rules already exclude judicial reviews by people with little or no interest in the claim.   &#xa0;As recently acknowledged by the Right Hon Lady Justice Hale, public law is concerned with public wrongs, rather than individual rights. A broad test for standing allows alleged abuses of executive power to be challenged when those affected by a policy or decision cannot bring a case themselves – for logistical or financial reasons, because they are not aware of the issue, or because they lack access to lawyers.  The Commission's analysis suggests that many public interest challenges could not otherwise be brought by a claimant with a direct personal interest in the matter. &#xa0;For example, there is sometimes no victim who could, in practice, bring a claim.  This is illustrated by the judicial review in which Medical Justice, a non-governmental organisation (NGO), successfully challenged a policy that certain individuals would get little or no notice of their removal directions (the specific arrangements made for their removal from the United Kingdom). No individual could have brought that claim because by the time they became aware that the policy applied to them they would be in the process of being deported.  It may also sometimes be appropriate for a judicial review application to be made before new legislation takes effect.  In these circumstances, an organisation is more likely to bring the claim, because the legislation has not yet had a direct impact on any individuals.  One example is the judicial review brought by Age UK challenging the national default retirement age of 65 that was about to be introduced by the Employment Equality (Age) Regulations 2006. These examples illustrate the important role of NGOs in relation to issues where there is no appropriate individual who can bring the claim, although the volume of cases that they bring is acknowledged by the MoJ to be relatively small.  NGOs are often well placed to represent the interests of an affected group, can support their claim with specialist evidence, and their presence lends an institutional overview to the issue.  Considering a claim on a question of policy or legal principle brought by an NGO is a more efficient use of court time than dealing with a group claim brought by many different individuals.  In these circumstances, it is also more appropriate for the court not to be limited to considering the facts of individual cases.&#xa0;Similarly, the court has been willing to accept the standing of professional representative groups, when the interests of their members are affected rather than the interests of the group itself.  In a few cases, the court has shown itself willing to recognise the standing of a concerned individual bringing a public interest challenge. &#xa0;Under Section 30 Equality Act 2006, the Commission has standing to apply for judicial review in relation to its statutory functions. We have made reference to this power in pre-action correspondence where litigation was ultimately avoided.  In a small number of cases, and only after extensive engagement with the public body concerned, we have used Section 30 to issue proceedings where we considered that it was in the public interest for us to act to avoid the risk of a breach of equality or human rights law that could not be addressed by other means.  One example is the case of R (Equality and Human Rights Commission) v Secretary of State for Justice,  where the Commission argued successfully that the National Offender Management Service had failed to comply with the Race Equality Duty or the Disability Equality Duty in concluding a service level agreement with the UK Border Agency for the removal of foreign national prisoners.  &#xa0;Research indicates that a high proportion of judicial review claims settle in favour of the claimant, suggesting that the majority of cases have substantial merit. Our own experience as an intervener in judicial review cases confirms that settlements favourable to the claimant are often reached before the final hearing.  &#xa0;In the Commission’s assessment, none of the alternative tests for standing suggested by the MoJ in its consultation paper would be appropriate.  The standing test for challenges to EU measures in the European Court of Justice is too narrow, and would not sit well with the UK traditions of open access to justice. The narrow ‘victim’ test under the HRA has proved to be a barrier to a number of public interest challenges, and this problem would only be compounded if the test were introduced for ordinary public law claims.  While the tests for statutory planning challenges (‘a person aggrieved’) and for civil legal aid are both preferable to either the EU or HRA test, our assessment is that the current, well-established test is more appropriate than either of these. &#xa0;The MoJ has not considered the possibility that introducing a narrower test for standing could lead to an increase in pre-hearing costs to resolve disputes.  Requiring judicial interpretation of a new standing test may cause additional court time and resources to be spent on satellite litigation.  Another factor that has not been considered is the possibility that preventing NGOs and representative bodies from bringing individual claims could lead to an increase in group claims – that is, where individual claimants raising similar issues apply to the court for a Group Litigation Order.  This would undoubtedly lead to more costly and resource intensive litigation for both claimants and defendants and an increase in the burden on the courts.  &#xa0;As the MoJ recognises, standing cannot be restricted in environmental law cases because of the requirements of the Aarhus Convention.  In the Commission’s analysis, there is no principled distinction between environmental challenges and challenges involving equality and human rights issues. There is also a risk that changing the standing test for non-environmental cases would create satellite litigation to establish whether a particular issue is ‘environmental’ or not. &#xa0;

[[[Third party interventions ]]]The role of an intervener is to assist the court with relevant evidence or information, submissions of law, expertise or a perspective which has not already been provided by the parties (and so would not otherwise be available to the Court). An intervener does not become a party to the proceedings and does not necessarily align with either party or have a personal interest in the outcome of the case. There is no right of intervention and the Court determines whether leave to intervene is given, usually only where it considers the intervention will be necessary or helpful.

[[[ ]]] In the Commission's own experience of making interventions, the process by which a prospective intervener applies for leave to intervene

[[[ ]]]provides a level of scrutiny which ensures clarity about the nature and value of an intervention. &#xa0;The application process also assists in quantifying the likely costs arising from a proposed intervention. The parties have an opportunity to give their views to the court with regard to the merits of the application to intervene, the form/means of the intervention (oral or written) and the timing of it, together with the costs implications. Interveners are not invariably granted leave to make oral submissions to the court. Where the court does grant permission to make an oral submission, this is often limited to no more than an hour – or in some cases to 20 minutes. &#xa0;The additional material provided by interveners can play an important role in judicial review proceedings, owing to their adversarial nature. The parties may not have the time, resources or expertise to provide all the information relevant to determining the issues, especially where questions of public importance arise and the impact of the judgment extends beyond the facts of the case.  &#xa0;The value of interventions was considered by the Right Hon Baroness Hale, Deputy President of the Supreme Court, in a recent speech. Her view was that the court often welcomes help on difficult issues and that permission is given to interveners because the court wants to have a broader perspective of the issues before it because, in an adversarial system, the parties cannot be relied on in this regard.  She suggested that it can be particularly helpful when an intervener makes submissions in relation to international jurisprudence and instruments.  In her view, there was often value in allowing oral submissions, as this gives an intervener the chance to react to the court and answer specific questions which the court may wish to raise. &#xa0;Statistics about the number and nature of interveners are not currently collated by HM Courts and Tribunals Service (HMCTS) but a report by the NGO Justice found that there were 89 interveners in the House of Lords between 2005 and 2009. Of these, 44 were public bodies (including government departments), 34 were NGOs and 11 were private organisations. Taking account of the high proportion of interveners that are public bodies, it is clear that intervening in proceedings is a legal tool which they value, often as a means of supporting their own interpretation of law or policy.  &#xa0;Since 2007, the Commission has intervened in 27 cases in the administrative court, of which 22 have been concluded and four have only recently been heard or are awaiting hearing.  Our assessment is that in 14 of those 22 cases, the Commission’s intervention has had a substantial influence on the proceedings. This includes instances where the court has reflected and/or adopted the Commission's submissions in its judgment – irrespective of whether or not there was a successful outcome for the claimant. It also includes cases where, in the Commission’s assessment, our intervention has encouraged settlement. &#xa0;In some cases, the Commission has been asked to intervene by the court. One example is the case of A Local Authority v A (a child) &amp; Anor, where the Commission’s submissions on the positive obligations under Article 5 ECHR were accepted by the court. In R (South West Care Homes &amp; Others) v Devon County Council, the Commission intervened to clarify the relevance of the PSED for authorities when they are developing proposals.&#xa0;The Commission’s submissions contributed to the final ruling, with the court emphasising the need for authorities to give due regard to the potential impact on vulnerable people of possible care home closures or reduced support.

[[[ ]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]Based on our analysis of the role of interveners outlined above, and our own experience of making interventions, the Commission supports the proposal for a presumption that interveners bear their own costs – but not the costs incurred by the claimant or defendant when pursuing issues raised by the intervener.  It is our own practice, when applying to intervene, to state that we will be responsible for our own costs.  &#xa0;However, there may be cases where an intervener takes a more central role in proceedings. For example, in R (E) v Governing Body of Jewish Free School &amp; others, costs were awarded against one of the interveners, the United Synagogue, which had taken a principal role in opposing the claim. In circumstances such as these, the court has discretion to consider making an award of costs against an intervener, using the approach set out in Rule 46(3) and Practice Direction 6.9 of the Rules of the Supreme Court.  There may also be situations where, under the court rules, a party could pursue a wasted costs order.&#xa0;

[[[Legal aid for judicial review applications]]]The Commission

[[[ ]]]submitted evidence to the JCHR’s inquiry into the implications for access to justice of the Government’s proposed legal aid reforms, including the amended proposals to legal aid for judicial review set out in the present consultation paper.   For ease of reference, an extract from this submission is set out below:“At present, legal aid is available – subject to a means and merits test – to fund applications for permission in judicial review cases. The MoJ is proposing that legal aid would not cover the costs of the application except, retrospectively, where permission is granted by the court. This means that much of the pre-permission work in judicial review cases would be at the provider’s risk. Although Legal Help would be available for legal research and pre-action correspondence, it does not cover the important preparation work that follows the pre-action stage.&#xa0;“Responses to the MoJ consultation [Transforming Legal Aid], including the Commission’s own response, argued that this proposal not only targeted weak judicial review cases, but would also unfairly affect cases with merit where the case concludes before the court considers the application for permission, and no order as to costs is made.  The MoJ had also failed to consider the genuine uncertainty faced by practitioners when assessing the merits of a judicial review – particularly as they do not have possession of all relevant documents and because judges have inconsistent approaches to permission applications.&#xa0;“The MoJ has now revised its proposals in response to these concerns. It proposes to allow the Legal Aid Agency discretion to pay providers in certain cases that conclude before a permission decision by the court, where costs have not been agreed as part of a settlement. The discretion would be exercised according to certain criteria, including the reason for the provider not obtaining a costs agreement, the extent to which the clients obtained the remedy or redress they were seeking in the proceedings, and the likelihood that the court would have granted permission had the application been considered.&#xa0;“While the revised legal aid proposal meets some of the points that the Commission raised in its response to the April 2013 consultation, our analysis is that it will not address all of them.  The claimant will still have to run a series of financial risks because of uncertainty about whether or not the case will be given permission by the court, whether it will become academic or be conceded before permission is granted, whether or not the defendant will agree to pay costs as part of a settlement agreement, whether the court will order ‘inter partes’ costs following a costs hearing, or whether the Legal Aid Agency will use its discretion to pay costs at legal aid rates.&#xa0;“The proposed list of factors that the Legal Aid Agency would take into account in considering the exercise of discretion will offer little certainty to claimant solicitors. Given the unpredictability of the outcome of applications for permission when considered by the court, one may assume that the Legal Aid Agency’s assessment of the likelihood that the application would have been granted will be equally uncertain. As pointed out in the Commission's earlier consultation response [to Transforming Legal Aid], the new funding regime will make it almost impossible to accommodate ‘rolled up’ hearings – where the question of permission is adjourned to be decided at the same time as the substantive claim.  Claimants’ lawyers will want to avoid the risk of preparing the whole case without knowing whether permission will be granted.  While rolled up hearings can offer a cost efficient use of the court’s time, judges will be mindful of the increased financial risks for claimants and may be unwilling to list legally aided cases in this way.&#xa0;“In the Commission’s analysis, the revised proposal for legal aid in applications for permission in judicial review may well deter important applications in cases that would have succeeded.  This could have a negative impact on access to justice, raising concerns about compliance with Article 6 ECHR and access to justice for victims of breaches of other Articles of the ECHR. It may also have an impact on individuals’ ability to bring judicial reviews based wholly or partly on alleged breaches of the PSED. &#xa0;“The Commission's analysis suggests that it is important to monitor the cumulative impact of the current and proposed reforms to identify and mitigate, as far as possible, any adverse effects on an individual’s right of access to the courts to challenge the exercise of Government power.&#xa0;“It should be noted that, following the December 2012 consultation on judicial review, the Government has now removed the right to an oral renewal of an application where it is assessed by a judge, on the papers, as being ‘totally without merit’. The Commission's analysis supports the suggestion put forward in some responses to the April 2013 consultation that, as an alternative, the Government should consider only withholding legal aid where a permission application is certified as ‘totally without merit.”&#xa0;The Commission notes that the Impact Assessment produced by the MoJ to support its revised proposal has estimated savings to the Legal Aid Agency of around £1 million to £3 million per annum. However, no consideration has been given to the potential burdens on the court system of individuals who cannot obtain legal aid opting to bring judicial reviews as litigants in person. A literature review by the Ministry of Justice (2011) concluded that litigants in person could face problems in court, such as understanding the rules of evidence, identifying legally relevant facts and dealing with court forms.  Research into the views of other court participants, including court staff and the judiciary, suggested a concern that compensating for these difficulties created extra work and potentially presented ethical challenges.&#xa0;Ward LJ recently commented on the difficulties faced by the judiciary at all levels when dealing with litigants in person, and the impact on access to justice:  &#xa0;‘The expense of three judges of the Court of Appeal dealing with this kind of appeal is enormous. The consequences by way of delay of other appeals which need to be heard are unquantifiable. The appeal would certainly never have occurred if the litigants had been represented. With more and more self-represented litigants, this problem is not going to go away. We may have to accept that we live in austere times, but as I come to the end of eighteen years service in this court, I shall not refrain from expressing my conviction that justice will be ill served indeed by this emasculation of legal aid.’&#xa0;

[[[Impact of legal aid reforms combined with proposed residence test]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]The JCHR is also seeking evidence on the effect of restricting legal aid for judicial review in combination with the proposed residence test for civil legal aid, by which applicants would need to prove current lawful residence in the UK as well as demonstrating that they had previously been lawfully resident for at least 12 months.&#xa0;As suggested in the Commission’s submission to the JCHR’s earlier inquiry into the proposed legal aid reforms, applying a residence test to legal aid applicants may, in particular cases, result in breaches of Article 6(1) of the ECHR. This could affect both individuals living in this country,  and people living abroad whose rights have been breached by the UK.&#xa0;Because the proposed test would be based on residence, it is more likely to have an adverse impact on non-UK nationals, including those seeking to apply for judicial review. It is strongly arguable that the residence test would unjustifiably discriminate against particular groups of people, whether these groups are defined by the status of ‘non-UK national’ or ‘non-UK resident’. This could be in violation of Article 6(1) read with Article 14 ECHR, which guarantees freedom from discrimination in the enjoyment of ECHR rights.   &#xa0;In the Commission's analysis, the statement of Equalities Impact annexed to the MoJ’s ‘Transforming Legal Aid’ consultation paper (where the residence test was first proposed) gives inadequate attention to the potentially discriminatory impact of the residence test, whether it can be objectively justified and whether the impact could be mitigated.  Transforming Legal Aid refers to the need to reduce costs and better target public resources. As noted in our response to that consultation, case law makes it clear that costs alone are not a legitimate aim that can support the justification of indirect discrimination.  Direct discrimination (except in relation to age) is always unlawful.&#xa0;The Commission recognizes that the MoJ has now proposed additional exceptions to the residence test, and intends to allow individuals a break of up to 30 days in the required 12 month period of lawful residence. However, spouses, partners and children of long-term residents and EEA nationals, together with those who have refugee status, might still be excluded if they have not completed a year’s residence in the UK. Also excluded would be British citizens who have not lived continuously in the UK for a twelve month period.  &#xa0;The impact of the residence test is that excluded individuals would not receive funding for judicial review applications, even though Parliament has determined that judicial review is an important enough area of law to remain within the scope of civil legal aid.   &#xa0;The exceptional funding scheme makes provision for the Director of Legal Aid to grant funding for cases normally excluded from scope, where a failure to fund the case would breach the individual's rights under the ECHR or enforceable EU rights, or where funding is appropriate having regard to the risk of such a breach.  Funding is limited to the minimum services required to meet these international obligations. The Ministry of Justice maintains that exceptional circumstances funding would be available to people who did not meet the residence test.  &#xa0;The exceptional funding scheme has been in operation since April 2013. Applications under the scheme must be submitted to the Legal Aid Agency on a detailed form (14 pages in length).  Legal advisers are not paid for the time involved in taking instructions from the client or completing the form unless the application for funding is successful.   As noted by the Commission in its response to the Transforming Legal Aid consultation, making providers take on the risk of not being paid for the work involved in making the application may reduce their willingness to help clients apply for exceptional funding.  Further, the existence of the scheme does not address the problem of clients being deterred from seeking legal advice in the first place, especially if they assume that they will be turned away because they cannot satisfy the residence test.   &#xa0;The Public Law Project (PLP) runs a project which helps people to make exceptional funding applications.  In their experience, the application process is onerous and complex, and ill-suited to applications made in person – especially where there are barriers relating to literacy, English language skills or disability.  The Ministry of Justice had estimated that, in its first year of operation, there would be between 5,000 and 7,000 applications for exceptional funding.  However, statistics provided to the Public Law Project by the Legal Aid agency show that, pro rata, a fraction of this number of applications is being made, and indicate a very low success rate.  &#xa0;The Equalities Impact statement published with the Transforming Legal Aid consultation paper suggests that the discriminatory impact of the residence test would, in part, be justified by the exceptional funding scheme. The Commission notes that neither this consultation paper, nor the Government response to the consultation, explains how the exceptional funding provisions would apply in practice to cases that do not satisfy the residence test.  As well as showing that their case has legal merit, non-residents would be required to establish that a failure to give exceptional funding would be in breach of their ECHR or EU rights. A published legal opinion notes that this high-threshold additional requirement is only imposed on non-residents and, being part of the differential treatment, it cannot be used to justify the differential treatment that the residence test would involve.&#xa0;The Commission's analysis also suggests the residence test would be difficult to operate in practice.  Lawyers and advisers without expertise in immigration law cannot be expected to determine a client's status accurately. Even a specialist immigration practitioner may not be able to ascertain whether a person is lawfully resident in the UK unless the client can produce all relevant documents.  Some people may lack evidence of 12 months’ lawful residence in the UK – for example if they are a British citizen or have a right of residence under EU law – or their status may be complicated or unclear for a range of reasons.  Delays in ascertaining a person’s immigration status may lead to them missing the three month deadline for a judicial review application. &#xa0;The proposed residence test could also deny legal aid to people living outside the UK who want to bring judicial review proceedings under domestic law because of alleged human rights abuses by agents of the UK state. There is a risk that this exclusion would breach the strong procedural obligations of the state under Article 2 ECHR (the right to life) and Article 3 ECHR (freedom from torture and inhuman or degrading treatment).&#xa0;Implementing the proposed residence test could risk preventing litigation of the highest constitutional importance.  Examples of these cases are:&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The cases of Baha Mousa (Al-Skeini) and Al-Sweady, which resulted in public inquiries being established into the ill-treatment of Iraqi civilians and the alleged non-combat killings of Iraqi insurgents by British troops; &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; R (Alaa’ Nassif Jassim Al Bazzouni) v The Prime Minister &amp; Others,  which involved challenges to the guidelines under which British Intelligence and military agents participate in joint combat operations with third party states overseas; and &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Ali Zaki Mousa v Secretary of State for Defence, which concerned whether the processes set up to investigate allegations of ill-treatment by British forces in Iraq are sufficiently independent to satisfy the investigative duties arising under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.&#xa0;The residence test could also exclude judicial reviews by UK residents who are not physically present in the United Kingdom when they become the victim of unlawful actions.  The Binyam Mohammed litigation, for example, concerned UK residents who were kept out of the country as victims of unlawful rendition and detention abroad.&#xa0;If the residence test is implemented, such cases would be much less likely to be litigated in the UK courts or come to public attention - particularly as legislation has now excluded legal aid for judicial reviews that do not have the potential to produce a direct benefit for the claimant.  This will exclude funding for cases such as Maya Evans' judicial review concerning the transfer of detainees to Afghan custody. &#xa0;

[[[Protective costs orders ]]]The system of Protective Costs Orders (PCOs) has been evolved by the courts as a device for limiting the claimant’s exposure to the risk of paying the defendant’s costs, should the claim fail and a costs order be made against the claimant.  The current PCO regime was established by the Court of Appeal, which set out general principles for granting a PCO. These included whether the issues are of general public importance, the public interest in resolving them, the financial means of the claimant and whether the claimant lacks any private interest in the outcome of the case.  The application of these principles is at the discretion of the court, taking into account all the circumstance of the case.  Cases where PCOs are granted may involve arguments relating to equality or human rights, or the claimants may represent the interests of vulnerable individuals who share a protected characteristic.&#xa0;In recent cases where PCOs have been granted, the courts have been less concerned to ensure that the claimant lacks any private interest in the judicial review.  This more flexible approach to PCOs was established by the Court of Appeal in the case of Morgan v Hinton Organics and has been applied by the High Court in a number of subsequent cases. &#xa0;The MoJ suggests that this has ‘tipped the balance too far’ in favour of claimants and has proposed a new stipulation that a PCO should be denied to a claimant with a private interest in the case.  However, the impact of this proposal was not fully monetised in the MoJ’s Impact Assessment and the Commission does not consider a convincing case for change has been made. The courts already apply a fact-sensitive analysis to the question of whether a PCO should be made and, if so, on what terms. In judicial review claims where a PCO is requested there is rarely equality of arms between the parties; were that the case, it is unlikely that the claimant would be making such an application.   PCO applications with a realistic prospect of success can only be made by a claimant with limited resources who is challenging, in the public interest, the decision of a public body with superior resources. &#xa0;In the Commission’s analysis, the court should retain full discretion in relation to PCOs. If a case relates to an issue of general public importance which it is in the public interest to resolve, the court should not be prevented from considering the grant of a PCO to a claimant who happens to have a secondary personal interest in the outcome.  

[[[Procedural defects in decisions ]]]The MoJ has put forward proposals to deal with the perceived problem of judicial review being used to challenge ‘procedural defects.’  These proposals suggest that the role of judicial review is perhaps not fully understood.  It is not a system of appeal, but a process by which the High Court scrutinises the legality of decisions by public bodies.  Essentially, judicial review is concerned with the manner in which a decision is reached, rather than the merits of the decision itself.   Remedies in judicial review are always discretionary; even if the court finds that a decision or action was unlawful, it can refuse to order a remedy such as a quashing order or a mandatory order, or it can choose only to make a declaration that the decision was unlawful.  &#xa0;In the Commission’s analysis, on the rare occasions when a decision is quashed only to be remade in similar terms, this is not necessarily a poor use of court resources. The principal purpose of public law challenges is to ensure decisions are made properly by the executive bodies that are responsible for making them. Successful judicial reviews are not rendered ‘unsuccessful’ when they are followed by a properly made decision that is similar in substance to a decision that was unlawfully made before. Relevant to this issue is the role of the PSED, which requires public authorities to have due regard to the need to eliminate discrimination, advance equality and foster good relations when performing their functions – whether this involves formulating policies or taking operational decisions.  The PSED is a duty of consideration, rather than a duty to achieve any particular outcome or result. In judicial review cases involving the PSED and the predecessor duties, the courts have emphasised the importance of this duty of consideration and the need for authorities to have a conscious approach and state of mind when taking decisions.   In the recent Court of Appeal judgment in the Bracking case, Lord Justice McCombe emphasised the role of the PSED in making sure that a public body takes decisions lawfully: &#xa0;‘It seems to me that if a decision is reached without due regard to the PSED then it is an unlawful decision and, subject to any overarching discretionary features, the decision should be quashed.’&#xa0;In the Commission’s analysis, requiring the court to consider a 'no difference' defence at the permission stage risks forcing a full examination of the merits of the decision at the beginning of the case. The court would otherwise be unable to assess whether a different decision is likely or possible on the facts.  However, this approach could substantially increase the costs of the parties and those of the court at the permission stage. The Commission accepts that whether or not a remedy should be granted at the end of the case may sometimes turn on a 'no difference' argument. However, the quality of decision-making should be the primary focus of the permission stage. &#xa0;We recognise that 'no difference' arguments may be considered at a 'rolled up' hearing and that this can, in principle, save time and costs.  However, if the MoJ implements its proposals to restrict legal aid for cases where permission is refused, rolled up hearings will be very unattractive for claimant lawyers who will understandably want to avoid the financial risk of preparing the whole case without knowing whether permission will be granted.  &#xa0;Another question is the extent to which, in practice, a clear distinction can be made between procedural flaws in administrative decisions, and substantive illegality. In the Commission’s analysis, this is not a clear-cut as the MoJ suggests. Many judicial review claims are brought on multiple grounds and often more than one ground succeeds.  The principles of administrative law require the decision to be taken again, unless it is inevitable that it would be the same as when it was made unlawfully.   It is not in the interests of the courts or the parties to generate more courtroom argument at the permission stage about whether that threshold, or any other lower threshold, is really met. &#xa0;In addition, it is important to consider the impact of encouraging a defendant to present a 'no difference' defence. If the defendant loses and the original decision is quashed, the decision must be taken afresh. However, as the defendant has previously asserted (through the ‘no difference’ defence) that the decision would remain unchanged if the judicial review succeeds, it will be hard to convince the claimant and the general public that the new decision will be made in good faith and with an open mind – as by law it should be.  

[[[The Public Sector Equality Duty and judicial review ]]]The MoJ noted that the PSED review concluded that some public bodies adopt an overly risk adverse approach to the PSED because of ‘uncertainty as to how the courts would interpret the concept of ‘due regard’’.  The review recommended a ‘proportionate and appropriate’ approach to enforcing the PSED, and asked the Government to consider alternative means of reconciling disputes. The Commission’s analysis suggests that excluding PSED disputes from the scrutiny of the courts, were that to be proposed, would be a counter-productive development.  As we note below, the courts have played a key role in clarifying the ‘due regard’ duty – most recently in the case of Bracking.   While the Commission’s own role in enforcing the duty must be recognised, it would be unrealistic for this to become the primary means of scrutinising public authorities’ compliance – especially as using these formal powers can be resource-intensive.  Our analysis of alternative methods of dispute resolution, particularly ombudsmen and mediation, suggests that they have a limited role to play in resolving PSED disputes.In summary, our assessment suggests that insufficient account has been taken of the role of the pre-litigation protocol in assisting resolution of potential judicial review claims involving the PSED, and the role of the permission stage in encouraging early settlement.  As noted above, research indicates that a high proportion of judicial review claims settle in favour of the claimant, suggesting that the majority of cases have substantial merit.  Reminding a public authority that it is exposed to a potential judicial review can lead to a positive outcome without undue burden, if the authority promptly re-considers the decision in question to ensure compliance with the ‘due regard’ duty.&#xa0;The Commission notes that relatively few judicial review claims involving the PSED proceed to a full hearing, and those that do almost always involve other grounds of challenge. We have undertaken our own analysis of 33 judicial review cases considered by the courts at a substantive hearing where the claimant relied on the PSED under Section 149 of the Equality Act 2010 (these cases did not include claims that were settled without going to a full hearing.)  Our analysis suggests that, were the PSED to be eliminated as a ground for judicial review, most of these challenges would have been taken on other grounds in any event.&#xa0;Of these 33 cases, there were only three where the PSED was the sole ground of challenge; in the other 30 cases, one or more other grounds were advanced by the claimant (for example, breach of statutory obligations, breach of the HRA, failure to consult, irrationality in decision-making, failure to follow own policies, acting ultra vires, breach of legitimate expectation).  In six cases, the PSED arguments were successful. In another case, the PSED arguments were not considered because the court allowed the claim on another ground.   Three other cases, where the PSED challenge did not succeed, were successful on non-PSED grounds. The Commission of course recognises that it is preferable to avoid judicial review proceedings where possible. In our analysis, a statutory Code of Practice for the PSED would help public bodies understand their responsibilities under the duty and may help disputes arising in the first place. In response to the report of the PSED review, the Commission’s chair, Baroness Onora O’Neill, wrote to the Secretary of State suggesting that:‘.....the best way to reduce bureaucracy and over-engineering of compliance with the PSED would be to publish a statutory Code. This would allow public bodies to be clear about what is legally required and to depend on the Code in defending challenges, because the courts place far greater weight on a Code than on guidance. Guidance cannot substitute for the certainty which a Code provides for bodies that may otherwise adopt what they intend to be a risk averse approach, which may lead to heavier bureaucratic requirements. This would be a key step in tackling the ‘gold plating’ that the report says has been identified.’The Commission acknowledges its own role in helping avoid disputes relating to the PSED that might otherwise lead to individuals or organisations bringing claims for judicial review.  The Commission takes a proportionate approach to the use of its powers, focusing primarily on promoting understanding of the PSED and encouraging compliance – including through publication of our guidance materials.  To maximise the impact of this work, we aim to collaborate with strategic partners, including regulators, inspectorates and ombudsmen (RIOs).   We recognise RIOs as key drivers for change in their sectors, as public authorities tend to focus on areas where they expect their performance to be scrutinised by sector regulators.Where the need for formal enforcement of the PSED is indicated, the Commission has a number of legal powers.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Under Section 31EA 2006, the Commission may conduct an assessment of whether a body has complied with the PSED general duty. It must first publish terms of reference, after consulting with organisation(s) to be assessed.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Under Section 32 EA 2006, if - following an assessment - the Commission thinks that an organisation has failed to comply with the PSED general duty, it can issue a compliance notice setting out steps to be taken within 28 days.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Without first conducting an assessment, the Commission can also issue a compliance notice to a listed authority that has not complied with the specific duties under the PSED. &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Under Section 30 EA 2006, the Commission can bring a claim for judicial review in its own name against an authority that has not complied with the PSED general duty.  However, this power is rarely used.The Commission recognises that using these formal powers can be resource intensive and that they could, in some circumstances, risk encouraging defensiveness rather than openness on the part of the public bodies concerned.  In our response to the government consultation: 'Building a fairer Britain: reform of the Equality and Human Rights Commission', we noted that when fulfilling our role our status prevents us from using simple, effective methods such as mystery shopping that are open to charities and media organisations. We suggested in our response that allowing this modest increase in our transparency powers would decrease costs and increase our effectiveness.In the Commission’s analysis, the MoJ has taken insufficient account of the pre-litigation protocol that must be observed before a claim for judicial review is issued (including in disputes involving the PSED) and the impact of the permission filter operated by the courts. The pre-action protocol requires the parties to consider whether some form of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) procedure would be more suitable than litigation, and if so, to seek agreement on which form to adopt. The list of ADR options includes discussion and negotiation, Ombudsman services, early neutral evaluation and mediation. Under the protocol, both the claimant and defendant may be required by the Court to provide evidence that alternative means of resolving their dispute have been considered.The permission stage for judicial review not only serves as a mechanism for filtering out cases that lack merit; it also allows the judge to provide a form of early neutral evaluation which can encourage the parties to reach a settlement without the need for a full hearing. As shown by research cited below, over half the cases that are granted permission are then settled without going to a full hearing.  An additional factor is that, as part of the permission stage, the defendant must give the claimant disclosure of all relevant documents – which puts the claimant in a better position to evaluate the strength of the claim and which may, in turn, support the negotiation of a settlement.There is some scope for Ombudsman schemes to investigate complaints involving alleged breaches of the PSED.  The Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman (PHSO), the Local Government Ombudsman (LGO), the Prisons and Probation Ombudsman and the Housing Ombudsman are likely to be the most appropriate options. The LGO has dealt with a number of complaints that involved breaches of the PSED and the former equality duties for gender, race and disability. While some Ombudsman schemes may have a complementary role in ensuring compliance with the PSED, in the Commission’s analysis they cannot fulfill the same role as the courts. There are a number of reasons for this:&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The role of the LGO and the PHSO (in relation to government departments) is to investigate complaints of maladministration. This is not the same question as whether a public authority has complied with the ‘due regard’ duty under the PSED.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Although Ombudsman recommendations are usually followed, unlike court orders their decisions are not binding on the authorities concerned.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Ombudsman investigations generally consider administrative decisions that have already been taken, whereas a judicial review can consider the lawfulness of a decision-making process that has not yet been completed.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The three month time limit for judicial review applications helps focus attention on the dispute, and on possible settlement, at an early stage. Ombudsman investigations can be quite slow to conclude: for example, complex LGO cases may take up to a year.  In 2012-2013, the PHSO’s average investigation took 317 days.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Ombudsman schemes cannot usually consider cases that have gone to court, or would normally be expected to go to court. This means that complainants must decide from the outset which avenue of redress is the most appropriate.&#xa0;With regard to the role of mediation as an alternative to judicial review in resolving disputes involving the PSED, the Commission has given careful consideration to research conducted by the Public Law Project (PLP) on mediation and judicial review.  The research project was devised in response to claims by the Government and mediation providers that mediation can lead to savings in costs and court time, and provide remedies to disputes that are not available to the courts.  It aimed to examine the reasons for practitioners’ low take up of mediation for judicial review claims and consider whether it is possible or desirable to encourage greater take-up and – if so – in what circumstances.&#xa0;The Commission’s analysis of the research findings is that, while there may be some limited scope for mediation in judicial review, the potential for expanding its use should not be over-stated.  The judicial review pre-action protocol already gives strong encouragement to ADR approaches, and a high proportion of potential claims do not go ahead because they are settled or withdrawn.  However, a major barrier to the use of ADR is the judicial review time limits, which require proceedings to be issued promptly, and within three months in any event.&#xa0;The research recognised that the mandatory pre-action protocol for judicial review already plays a role in increasing the rate of settlement, by encouraging early correspondence between the parties.  Data was provided by a previous study, which looked at nearly 1,500 judicial review claims from issue to conclusion, together with 170 cases from first contact between the parties.  It was found that these early communications led to an average of 60 per cent of initial threats of judicial review not going ahead. Of these, 34 per cent were settled or withdrawn shortly after the claim was issued – either because the court granted interim relief, which effectively resolved the dispute; because a remedy was provided by the defendants; or – more rarely – because the claim was shown to lack merit. Of the claims that go forward to be considered at the permission stage by a judge, 60 per cent are refused permission to proceed. Of the cases that are granted permission, 56 per cent are settled before they reach a final hearing. Accordingly, only five per cent of judicial review claims were found to reach a substantive contested hearing.&#xa0;Practitioners interviewed for the research suggested that cases that cannot be resolved in direct negotiations could also be unsuitable for mediation.  This included urgent cases and claims where there was need for a legal determination on a point of policy or law.  A number of other factors appeared to militate against cases being mediated before a claim was issued – the most important of these being the requirement to issue proceedings promptly, and in any event no later than three months from the date of the decision being challenged. Another factor was the frequent imbalance of power between the parties: four times as many defendant solicitors as claimant solicitors gave ‘no room for compromise’ as a reason why they considered mediation to be unsuitable.  The research concluded that only in a small minority of cases would mediation seem attractive to defendants, namely where a duty has been acknowledged, but the precise terms of its performance are disputed. &#xa0;On the question of costs, the research found little, if any, evidence to support the suggestion that mediation is quicker or cheaper than judicial review.  The report concluded that mediation may well be both quicker and cheaper than (say) a five day hearing involving multiple parties, but noted that a judicial review that proceeds to a final hearing typically lasts no longer than a day or two. Hence, mediation is likely to be a more expensive option for most judicial review cases.&#xa0;In the Commission’s assessment, the role of judicial review in allowing the courts to clarify the ‘due regard’ duty under the PSED should not be under-estimated.  In the recent decision in Bracking, the Court of Appeal took the opportunity of endorsing the approach to ‘due regard’ established in the Brown case, bringing alongside the ‘Brown principles’ the dicta of other key judgments on the PSED/the former equality duties. The Court also emphasized the role of the PSED in the current climate of austerity:&#xa0;‘Any government, particularly in a time of austerity, is obliged to take invidious decisions which may exceptionally bear harshly on some of the most disadvantaged in society. The PSED does not curb government's powers to take such decisions, but it does require government to confront the anticipated consequences in a conscientious and deliberate way in so far as they impact upon the equality objectives for those with the characteristics identified in section 149(7) of the Equality Act 2010.’ (per Lord Justice McCombe at paragraph 74)27 November 2013Page 

[[[24]]] of 

[[[27]]] Paragraph 1 of Ministry of Justice consultation paper on Judicial review: proposals for further reform See Paragraph 10 of consultation paper.  The main driver of growth has been immigration and asylum cases, which will transfer to the Upper Tribunal on 1st November 2013  http://www.equalityhumanrights.com/key-projects/our-measurement-framework/ Per Sedley J in R v Somerset City Council ex p Dixon [1998] Env LR 111. The Right Hon Lady Justice Hale, Deputy President of the Supreme Court, speaking at the Judicial Review Trends and Forecasts conference, London 14 October 2013 R (Medical Justice) v SSHD [2010] EWHC 25 [2011] EWCA Civ 1710 R on the application of Age UK v Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills; Equality and Human Rights Commission and HM Attorney General intervening [2009] EWHC 2336 (Admin) Paragraph 78 of the consultation paper offers an estimate of 50 cases per year between 2007 and 2011 from NGOs, charities, pressure groups and faith organizations. Emerging findings from new research by Bondy and Sunkin suggest that even the MoJ figures are an over-estimate: http://ukconstitutionallaw.org/2013/10/25/varda-bondy-and-maurice-sunkin-how-many-jrs-are-too-many-an-evidence-based-response-to-judicial-review-proposals-for-further-reform/ Examples include R (BAPIO Action Ltd) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1139; R (Law Society) v the Lord Chancellor [2012] EWHC 794 For example, R v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs ex parte Rees-Mogg [1994] QB 552 R (Equality and Human Rights Commission) v SSJ [2010] EWHC 147 In a nine month sample of 22 non-immigration cases that settled after permission had been granted, only five settlements did not favour the claimant. Of 54 cases that settled after proceedings were issued and before permission was granted, 46 settled with a substantive benefit to the claimant. Bondy, V and Sunkin, M, 2009. The Dynamics of Judicial Review Litigation: The resolution of public law challenges before final hearing, Public Law Project.  The Aarhus Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters was ratified by the UK in 2005. Re Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission [2002] NI 2006, at paragraph 32, per Lord Woolf Speaking at Judicial Review Trends and Forecasts conference, London 14 October 2013 http://www.justice.org.uk/data/files/resources/32/To-Assist-the-Court-26-October-2009.pdf A Local Authority v A (a child) &amp; Anor [2010] EWHC 978 (COP) 4 May 2010 R (South West Care Homes &amp; Others) v Devon County Council [2012] EWHC 2967 R (E) v Governing Body of JFS &amp; others [2009] EWCA Civ 626 “46(3) Orders for costs will not normally be made either in favour of or against interveners but such orders may be made if the Court considers it just to do so (in particular if an intervener has in substance acted as the sole or principal appellant or respondent).”  Bondy, V. and Sunkin M. 2009. The Dynamics of Judicial Review. Public Law Project. Williams, K. 2011. Litigants in person: a literature review. Ministry of Justice  Wright v (1) Michael Wright Supplies Ltd and (2) Turner Wright Investments Ltd [2013] EWCA Civ 234 (at Para 2) Transforming legal aid: delivering a more credible and efficient system. Ministry of Justice, April 2013 Cross v British Airways PLP [2006] EWCA Civ 549 Para 19, Schedule 1 of the Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act (LASPO) 2012 Section 10 of the Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act (LASPO) 2012  Public Law Project Response to Transforming Legal Aid proposals, Judicial Review Journal, Volume 18, No 3, July 2013, page 80 Between 1 April and 1 July 2013 there were 233 applications for exceptional funding of which 6 were successful. Only two of these were for non-inquest cases. (Legal Action Magazine, September 2013, page 40). The legality of the proposed residence test for civil legal aid: joint opinion; Michael Fordham QC, Ben Jaffey, and Ravi Mehta of Blackstone Chambers; Judicial Review Journal, Volume 18, No 3, July 2013. R (Al-Skeini) v. Secretary of State for Defence [2007] UKHL 26  [2011] EWHC 2401 (Admin), [2012] 1 WLR 1389 [2013] EWHC 1412 (Admin) Para 19(3)of Schedule 1, Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 R (Corner House Research) v Secretary of State for Trade and Industry [2005] EWCA Civ 192 For example, R (Children’s Rights Alliance for England) v SSJ [2012] EWHC 8 (Admin) Morgan v Hinton Organics [2009] EWCA Civ 107 For example, R (Public Interest Lawyers) v Legal Services Commission

[[[ ]]][2010] EWHC 3259 (Admin), where it was held that the private interest of the claimant solicitors’ firm was not decisive and the claim – which related to tendering for legal aid contracts – satitisfied the public interest test overall R. (Brown) v. Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2008] EWHC 3158 Bracking v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2013] EWCA Civ 1345 A rolled up hearing is where the court considers the permission application and the substantive claim are considered at the same time. Bracking v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2013] EWCA Civ 1345 Of the 33 cases, 22 involved disability either as the sole protected characteristic or as one among several protected characteristics http://www.equalityhumanrights.com/news/2013/october/commission-responds-to-psed-review-report/ Equality and Human Rights Commission response to Government consultation: ‘Building a fairer Britain – reform of the Equality and Human Rights Commission’ (June 2011) http://www.equalityhumanrights.com/about-us/vision-and-mission/government-consultation-on-our-future/#full   http://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure-rules/civil/protocol/prot_jrv  Early neutral evaluation is a non-binding form of alternative dispute resolution where an independent expert is appointed to review the case and tell the parties the likely outcome if it went to trial. The process is designed to help the parties to negotiate a settlement http://www.ombudsman.org.uk/annual-report-2012-13/aiming-for-impact/aim-2-helping-more-people-by-investigating-more-complaints-and-providing-an-excellent-service-for-our-customers  Bondy, V and Mulcahy, L, 2009. Mediation and judicial review – an empirical research study. Public Law Project, London Bondy, V and Sunkin, M, 2009. The Dynamics of Judicial Review Litigation: The resolution of public law challenges before final hearing. Public Law Project, London. Bracking v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2013] EWCA Civ 1345

[[[ ]]]R (Brown) v Secretary of State for Work &amp; Pensions [2008] EWHC 3158 (Admin)