&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Professor Michael J Kelly FRS ]]]

[[[FREng]]]

[[[ (IPC0013)]]]1.              In 1868, the economist William Stanley Jevons FRS published ‘The Coal Question’.  He was the Lord Stern PBA of his day.  He noted that Britain was addicted to coal.  His main message was it should abandon the industrial revolution forthwith, as the future social collapse when the coal ran out (i.e. about now) would be too horrible to contemplate.  He was ignored and correctly so: alternatives to coal (i.e. oil and gas) were discovered as were much greater reserves of coal.  Arguably the world is a much better place for most people today compared with their great-grandparents in terms of the adequacy and variety of food, the quality and warmth of homes and the access to healthcare, education and transport.   The IPCC is using the science in AR5 to make similar claims today in the context of carbon dioxide emissions versus human progress as I now show.2.              The difference between living in 1800 and now is that each person in a developed country now uses about six-seven times as much energy per person per day.  Indeed using the per capita consumption of energy in 1800 as a unit, today we use approximately one unit on personal mobility on land, nearly another unit on mobility by air and sea, and three units on the manufacture and distribution of all that we buy.  We still use a comparable amount of energy in heating a main room of our house, sourcing local produce and tools as we did 200 years ago.   Nearly all this improvement in the living standards of the seven times as many people on earth as in 1800 has been and continues to be possible with the use of fossil fuels as the source of the extra energy.  Only of order 15% comes from biomass (i.e. using wood as a fuel as throughout history), nuclear and hydropower, and only a negligible (&lt;1%) amount from renewable energy.    Any recommendation to reduce carbon emissions by 80% without a readily available and mature non-carbon source of energy is actually more perverse now than the recommendation of Jevons in 1868.3.              The strength of the IPCC case that the world should severely curtail its carbon emissions in short order should be tensioned against other practical considerations.4.              Empirical studies of the global climate during the 20th century all suggest another century like the last and another temperature rise of order 1C.  It is only the computer models that produce the higher temperatures and the alarm.  In the IPCC’s ARC, the consensus rate of increase in temperature since 1950 has been revised down by a factor of two to a value of 0.1C/decade in agreement with the empirical results.  The computer models are acknowledged to have been predicting at least twice as much temperature rise as observed over the last 25 years, and they have not predicted the present temperature statis when the empirical models did, pointing to the repeated plateaux/falls starting in 1880, 1940 and now 2000.  If the present temperature statis continues for another decade or more, as the empirical models predict, then the climate models are demonstrably and seriously deficient as tools to predict the future.  Should another downward reduction in the rate of global warming be needed in the near future to accord with real-world data, the whole edifice of ‘unmanaged man-made’ climate change will be seen as a hollow scare as based on our limited present scientific understanding, and any potential downsides will be centuries away with ample time for technological fixes.  In the terms of a ‘risk’ analysis, the amount we should be willing to pay in any form of insurance premium should be coming down as a consequence of AR5.5.              At the recent 2-day meeting at the Royal Society entitled ‘Next Steps in Climate Science – the next steps’ I got one of the key speakers Professor Jochem Marotzke of Max Planck Institute for Meteorology, Germany to admit that he fully expected an upturn in the globally averaged temperature before 2020 on the basis of his models.  I was perturbed when he was cautioned that he was making himself a hostage to fortune.   In mainstream science that happens all the time, and it precisely the test of prediction against data that is the test of a theory.  The more general understanding is that most scientists would query the integrity and fitness-for-purpose of all of the models if they continue to miss the present hiatus should it continue for a period of 25 years.6.              If we do spend trillions of pounds globally at redirecting human living and introduce a non-carbon energy future, just what impact will it have on the future climate?   Can we be sure that higher temperatures will actually be avoided?  If not, the money spent on mitigation as opposed to adaption would have been largely wasted in terms of opportunities foregone to improve the human condition.  Is the science able to reassure us that mitigation really is value for money?7.              How sure are we that higher temperatures really will be as bad as made out?  The temperature rise to date has coincided with improvements in the human condition.  How robust is the case that this will turn sour in the future?  Over geological times there have been wider excursions in temperature and we are in what is historically a cold but interglacial period now.8.              If after all the analysis, the elimination of carbon dioxide emissions must be accelerated (a stage I am not convinced we have reached by any means), then we must tackle the challenge in a way that is likely to succeed, and not repeat the nonsenses of recent decades which manifestly are not succeeding and will not succeed to do the job.9.              The rush, in response to the 1970s oil crises, to install windmills and solar panels over square kilometres of the Mojave Desert in California in the 1980s should be a lesson to us now.  They can be seen by googling ‘abandoned windmills’ of ‘abandoned solar farms’.  Once subsidies stopped, they did not produce enough electricity to pay for their maintenance.  I am not persuaded that the renewable technologies are sufficiently more mature, robust and economic now than they were 30 years ago.  10.              Renewable energy sources are intrinsically dilute at source.  One needs all 1000 square kilometres of the Fen Country (now producing food) to generate 0.8-1GW from biomass if we harvested and burned miscanthus, a rapidly growing grass.  We already get 1.3GW from Sizewell B, the actual nuclear plant for which is less than one tenth of a square kilometre in area.  The factor of 10,000 in energy efficiency of the use of land is not something that can be closed by tinkering with the renewable energy efficiency.   Furthermore one can grow food or miscanthus or cover the land with solar panels, but not do more than one of these with the land at any one time.11.              In 2050 most of the 9B population of the earth will live in megacities.  Only nuclear energy and the burning of fossil fuels with complete carbon capture and storage produce energy numbers that add up to make global sense, but the latter technology (i.e. capture and storage) has not been demonstrated as effective and safe at anything like the scale needed.    Everything else, and especially renewable energy technologies, is hubris as far as energising megacities is concerned.12.              Business as usual is already striving for sustainability as a matter of good commercial sense – witness the myriad bulky devices of 20 years ago that are now in a smart phone in the palm of one’s hand.  The case for drastic deployment of immature and uneconomic energy technologies is not made, and is actually making matters worse in terms of both carbon emission increases and economic disruption where it has been deployed as here in the EU in particular.13.               Any policies that weaken economies will make matters worse and delay any changes that would ameliorate environmental damage.  It was the strength of the UK economy, and not its weakness, that allowed London and other cities to be cleaned up in the 1960s.  The same process will happen in the cities of China in due course.14.              Much less panic by way of response is called for even if the worst of the IPCC predictions came to pass, but it is much less likely that they will, given the scale-back buried in several places in the IPCC 5th assessment of the mean climate sensitivities.15.              The most serious defect of the IPCC 5th assessment report, as published, was the truculent and obfuscatory manner with which it admitted the temperature statis since 1996, halved its estimate of the rate of global warming over the last 60 years, and when insisting that it was more certain than ever that man was playing a role, that that role is still small in the context of the last 150 years of climate change.  A scientific report written by neutral consultants would have been much more upfront, yes, and honest, about these facts.16.              Finally, given that the Climate Change Act has the force of law, I would like to see a clearest possible statement of the legal consequences of the implementation of this Act going wrong: who takes legal responsibility if it proves that the expenditure in pursuit of the Climate Change Act is shown to be ineffective, unnecessary or counterproductive?November 2013&#xa0;