8&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by the Legal Aid Practitioners Group (JRR 0035)]]]The Legal Aid Practitioners Group is a membership organisation for firms and organisations with a contract to carry out legal aid work. Our members are based throughout England and Wales and are both private practices and not for profit organisations. Our members carry out civil and criminal work and cover the whole range of sizes from small sole principal firms to some of the largest providers of legal aid services in the country. 

[[[Introduction]]]1. In response to the JCHR’s call for evidence, this document sets out evidence from the Legal Aid Practitioners Group (LAPG) in relation to human rights issues raised by the following Government proposals relating to judicial review:               a. 

[[[Standing and third party interventions ]]]– The proposed introduction of a narrower test for               “standing” to apply for judicial review, so as to limit the range of people and groups who are               entitled to invoke the procedure, and the proposed modification of the rules to discourage               the involvement of interveners and third parties.              b. 

[[[Costs]]] – The proposed rebalancing of financial incentives so that providers are only paid for               work carried out on judicial review cases where permission is granted, or exceptionally in the               Legal Aid Agency’s discretion; and the proposed restriction on the availability of “Protective               Costs Orders” which can currently be made by courts to limit the possible costs exposure for a               claimant in a case judged by the court to be brought in the public interest.              c. 

[[[Procedural as opposed to substantive defects in decisions]]] – The proposal to reduce the               potential for delay by strengthening the courts’ powers in cases where a procedural defect               has been established which would have made no difference to the outcome had the correct               procedure been followed.  The Government is considering lowering the probability threshold               to include cases where it is not necessarily certain that the defect would have made no               difference, and/or by bringing forward the point at which the “no difference” question is               considered, so that applications for judicial review can be rejected on this basis at the               permission stage.              d. 

[[[The Public Sector Equality Duty]]] – The proposal to make non-justiciable the statutory duty               imposed on public bodies by the Equality Act, to have due regard to the need to eliminate               discrimination, by providing an alternative, non-judicial mechanism for resolving disputes               about whether public bodies have complied with the duty.              e. The Committee also seeks evidence on the combined effect of these proposals and:               (1) the Government’s proposals to reform legal aid, in particular the proposed               introduction               of a residence test and               (2) the provisions in Part 2 of the Immigration Bill reducing rights of appeal against               immigration decisions.2. LAPG notes that the Government’s latest proposals to make changes to judicial review are at variance with assurances made by Ministers to Parliament during the passage of the LASPO Act 2012 regarding the continued availability of legal aid for judicial review post-LASPO. For example, Ken Clarke gave an assurance that the Government would be “continuing legal aid in all cases involving judicial review”, and added that the Government “do not think that the Government or any public body should be resisting a claim about abuse of their powers from a litigant who cannot get legal advice” (Programme (No 3) motion, House of Commons, 17 April 2012, col 227). The Civil Legal Aid (Merits) Regulations 2012 issued under LASPO Act provided a more robust test for availability of legal aid for judicial review cases and has already restricted the availability of public funding.

[[[a. Standing and third-party interventions]]]3. It is constitutionally important that there are proper checks on the decisions of public bodies and that where there is an issue of serious concern, cases are able to be brought to shed light on the issues raised. There is no evidence to suggest that the proposed changes are needed.4. There are already many hurdles to climb over to satisfy the current test of standing to bring a judicial review:&#xa0;&#xa0;5. There is no evidence that numerous cases that have been brought just to seek publicity or hinder the process of proper decision-making. Evidence from the Public Law Project suggests that only around 3% of judicial review final hearings involve “public interest” claimants (such as charities). The current position on standing means that meaningful and important cases where nobody else could bring a case were properly raised before the Courts for determination e.g. the Medical Justice case (Medical Justice v SSHD [2010] EWHC 1925 (Admin). 6. The role of third party interventions is important and helps to ensure that relevant arguments are put. Speaking at the Public Law Project Conference 14 October 2013, Baroness Hale indicated that she found the interventions in the cases before her helpful.7. We would reiterate what we stated in our consultation response: namely that these proposals raise very important constitutional issues. We are greatly concerned to see them put forward on an ad hoc basis in a relatively short consultation, in a time of considerable change.

[[[b. Costs]]]8. We would briefly outline the points made in our response to the consultation about the problems of providers only being paid for work where permission is granted. We will then set out our concerns about the Legal Aid Agency discretion. Judicial review is a vital constitutional procedure for holding the decisions and omissions of public bodies to account in a democratic society. The original proposals were planned to save £1 million, a very small part of the overall budget. &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;9. We do not expect that inserting a provision that the Legal Aid Agency (LAA) may exceptionally pay costs will improve the situation because the relationship between providers and the LAA is such that providers would not treat the possibility of payment as very different to the original proposal of no payment unless permission is granted. 10. There are many examples where practitioners have acted to the absolute best of their ability to comply with contractual and other requirements, but the LAA has disagreed with the provider’s interpretation, either:&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;11. In these situations, either party may have made an error or there may be a disagreement over the interpretation of complex legal aid provisions.12. A practical example is the calculation of a client’s means. This used to be carried out without too much difficulty. Then legal help forms became longer. Regulations became lengthier. The LAA came under pressure from the National Audit Office on financial eligibility. More checks were carried out on file samples. Vulnerable, marginalised, chaotic clients now face a major barrier to justice as they seek to prove their financial eligibility. What practitioners have absorbed is that they need to cut out all risk so if, for example, a client with an emergency cannot prove their financial eligibility when they come to the office, there is every likelihood that they will not be seen. Why? Because if the client fails to return with the correct documentation, the practitioner cannot claim any of the fee.13. The level of auditing and the huge cost to practitioners of dealing with issues raised on audit means that it is unlikely that practitioners see the LAA as an agency that will exercise its discretion in favour of the practitioner. This concern has been highlighted by the LAA interpretation of when to grant exceptional case funding. 14. It is unrealistic for legal aid practices to do this work ‘at risk’ and the amended proposal would not alter this. The practical effect is that a case would not be brought in the first place because the legal team could not predict in advance what stage the case would reach.15. We would raise an added complication: namely that the current limitation on new matter starts for public law cases means that already existing providers have to ration legal help cases in public law. If the existing limit on new matter starts remains, then it will not be possible for providers to undertake work under legal help because they are insufficiently allocated at present.16. Regarding Protective Costs Orders, we think that PCOs play an important part in allowing matters of public interest to be considered by the judiciary and would oppose any changes. We refer to the analysis from the Public Law Project which makes it clear that there is no problem that needs to be tackled. The principles set out in the Corner House Case admirable and the Government has provided no information which gives cause for concern that frivolous cases could be brought. Nor has the Government indicated which cases it would class as ‘a campaign tool’.17. The Government has referred to inequality arising from PCOs but the bigger inequality is between those bringing the claims and those defending their actions. This is the true inequality of arms which needs to be addressed.

[[[3. Procedural as opposed to substantive defects in d]]]

[[[ecisions]]]18. There is no evidence that there is a problem that needs to be addressed. Certainly in legal aid cases the Legal Aid Agency would not fund legal aid for such a case unless the more onerous merits test is met, whether the challenge is based on procedural defects or any other ground. Our understanding is that procedural issues may be raised along with other issues but we would again ask for evidence of these purported cases which are so numerous or severe that the current carefully thought out processes face being overturned.

[[[4. The Public Sector Equality Duty]]]19. This is a summary of the points LAPG made in its consultation response:&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[5. The combined effect of these proposals and (1) the Government’s proposals to reform legal aid, in particular the proposed introduction of a residence test and (2) the provisions in Part 2 of the Immigration Bill reducing ]]]

[[[rights of appeal against immigration decisions.]]]20. In our view, it is unnecessary to make the proposed changes when there are so many mechanisms in place to protect abuse of the system.(1) The residence test21. The proposal is to introduce a residence test in order to qualify for any level of civil legal aid, with two limbs: firstly to be lawfully resident in the UK, crown dependencies or overseas territories, and secondly to have resided lawfully in these places for 12 months. 22. The Government has amended the original proposals              ‘125. Having carefully considered consultation responses, we have concluded that               there are further limited circumstances where applicants for civil legal aid on certain               matters of law (as set out in Schedule 1 to LASPO) would not be required to meet the               residence test. The test will not apply to the following categories of case (which               broadly               relate to an individual’s liberty, or where the individual is particularly vulnerable or where               the case relates to the protection of children): 23. Under “detention cases”, para 5 of Part 1 of Schedule 1 of the LASPO Act refers to Mental Health and Mental Capacity cases.24. We therefore understand that this would still leave the following categories of clients/cases having to meet the residence test:&#xa0;&#xa0;25. We stated that we believe that this proposal is unlawful, unjust, impractical and unnecessary. It removes access to justice arbitrarily for many vulnerable client groups and is indefensible.26. Other respondents will cover compliance with Articles 6 and 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights, Article 47 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, the Equality Act and other relevant legislation.27. In our view the proposal is discriminatory and will affect large numbers of vulnerable people who will, if the proposal is implemented, be at increased risk of physical and mental harm, with no effective remedy.28. This provision – which the Government does not suggest will save money – will affect all clients because the test will have to be met by all those seeking advice unless their case is clearly within the exceptions listed above. Many clients have no passport, will have difficulty with the first part of the test and will have difficulty providing the evidence that they have lawfully been here for a period of 12 months.29. Despite the concession, we believe that the proposal will also adversely affect vulnerable mentally incapacitated adults who currently have the protection of the powers of the Court of Protection.  Paragraph 5 Schedule 1 LASPO Act covers cases other than detention as well as detention.  Will clients with cases within this category be exempt or not?30. Schedule 3 of the MCA 2005 deals with the International Protection of Adults with incapacity and sets out the scope of the Court of Protection's jurisdiction in relation to those adults at paragraph 7 of the Schedule.  Part 2 of the Schedule specifically provides at Para 7(1)(c):              the court may exercise its function under this Act ( in so far as it cannot otherwise do so) in               relation to:-              ...              ...              (c) an adult present in England and Wales or who has property there, if the matter is               urgent, or              (d) an adult present in England and Wales, if a protective measure which is temporary and               limited in its effect to England and Wales is proposed in relation to him.&#xa0;31. These provisions appear to have been specifically added to include adults who would not otherwise meet the residency requirements of the Schedule. A typical case would be the removal of an incapacitated adult from another jurisdiction to England or Wales and an application to return the adult to the other jurisdiction. If the residence test as currently formulated is implemented then severely disabled persons who are at risk and require protection will be left without any remedy. This could in many cases result in physical or mental harm or even death.32. In our view any system which requires the provider to obtain proof of lawful residence for a period of a year will be wholly unworkable both because of practical difficulties in obtaining such evidence and also due to the complexities as to who is ‘lawfully’ resident (and for a year). If this proposal is implemented there will be practical difficulties in obtaining proof and providers will be risk averse because of reasons given above.33. We are concerned that the legal aid provider would need to gather the evidence in all cases, including people who are extremely vulnerable per se but also whose circumstances mean that they cannot easily find their own paperwork. Many people, particularly those who have chaotic lifestyles or disabilities, or who are in a time of crisis do not readily have access to documentary evidence of lawful residence. Even if, which we doubt, this client group could provide evidence of lawful residence for a year, the delay in producing the evidence prior to accessing legal advice would place them at very serious risk and may in some cases lead to their suffering harm or even death because of the administrative requirements.34. The complexity around the term ‘lawfully resident’ will result in confusion, people being denied advice to which they are entitled, and second guessing by the LAA. This in turn will, judging from past experience on e.g. financial eligibility evidence, lead to considerable additional expense for the LAA in auditing firms, appeals and other challenges, something recognised by the original Impact Assessment. We think that this has been seriously underestimated and will create massive problems for the efficient operation of the legal aid scheme.35. Additionally this is time which providers can ill afford to spend on administrative matters when businesses are already under extreme pressure.36. It is already difficult for people who are entitled to legal aid to satisfy the eligibility test because of its increased complexity following the LASPO Act. The residence test will make it even more difficult for people to obtain legal aid, even if under this new test they are lawfully entitled to do so. This is a non-evidence based proposal and the Government has shown no logical or defensible reason for its introduction. It is flawed on every level. 37. British Citizens who have not lived here for the last 12 months will have to show proof they have previously lived here for a period of 12 months which providers need to check, which for people who have lived abroad, possibly with their partner's job, may find very hard to prove. 38. The Government has acknowledged that it does not have data on the numbers of people affected by this proposal. It cannot cost it, either in terms of any savings to the legal aid fund or the additional cost to society from removal of access to legal aid.39. The Government has no evidence to say that this proposal is needed to shore up public confidence. There is no evidence that access to legal advice is a cause of unlawful entry or residence in the UK (and this would be most surprising). Public confidence in the legal aid system could be fostered by the Government explaining to the public what legal aid remains available for, and the fact that already only a very small percentage of the population is eligible for any legal advice at any level.40. As we stated in our response to the consultation, the effects of the LASPO cuts have yet to be evaluated but it was anticipated that they will result in over 600,000 people a year being denied access to justice. The LASPO Act cuts left a rump of a legal aid system accessible to a very small minority of the poorest and most vulnerable in society. The residence proposal will ensure that the poorest and most vulnerable of those, many of them lawfully and properly in the UK, will also now be excluded from access to justice. This proposal is not a transformation. It is a cut of the most politically cynical ‘slash and burn’ variety. (2) The Immigration Bill41. We do not propose to address this important issue as others will cover it in more detail.29 November 2013