&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Dr Margaret ]]]

[[[Sealey]]]

[[[ [FBB0021]]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;The present Royal Charter states that “The BBC exists to promote the public interest”. My comments concern two of the areas in which the BBC has this responsibility to promote Public Purposes, namely: &#xa0;&#xa0;Unfortunately the BBC fails in both of these Purposes, and I shall be expanding on this; and in some departments (not all – and these are the less subscribed, less popular radio programmes e.g. the Radio 4 Sunday programme from which I have had courteous replies) there seems to be little response following a comment or complaint. The output of the television channels, I have found, it is quite useless to remark upon – there is simply no interest in what viewers have to say.&#xa0;Sustaining Citizenship and Civil Society.  The output from the BBC regularly does not encourage responsible behaviour. My particular concerns are the portrayal of violence and loose sexual values. 1)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Violence.  Apart from the depiction of bloody violence in many programmes – even in wild life programmes, where animal behaviour seems to be presented as a model for human behaviour - in television soaps, for example, people are frequently furious and glaring daggers at each other: the way to be is angry and abusive, and tearing people apart, at least verbally. With regard to wild life programmes, presenters like David Attenborough seem to consider human beings the scourge of the planet. The Scare of overpopulation has been around since Malthus in the 1700’s. The population not only eat the cake, they also make it, and in fact are necessary for economic development. Scarcities are brought about by greed, wars and the abuse of the planet. It has been shown by those who have done the mathematics that the whole of the earth’s population could be accommodated comfortably in the state of Texas. The real population problem is a catastrophic fall in the birth rate in Western countries, so that there are insufficient young people in a population that can look forward to a longer life expectancy. Thus the proponents of abortion and contraception are the proponents also of euthanasia. The general idea: hate people. People are a scourge. It is irresponsible broadcasting that is the great scourge, not people who can be influenced for good or evil – by the BBC.2)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Loose Sexual Behaviour.   Loose sexual behaviour results in family breakdown and endless misery, particularly for the children involved who have no models of commitment and self sacrificing love in their parents, and therefore grow up in a kind of despair and a sense of alienation from those who should be nearest to them. It is not surprising if they feel alienated from society as a whole. Who can be trusted? Apart from that, through the attitudes of the media generally, the BBC included, they are betrayed and enticed into early sexual experimentation so that sexually transmitted diseases are epidemic; moreover, a young person becomes prey to the psychological and relational problems loose sexual encounters cause, severely damaging his/her prospects of forming a stable relationship, fit to build a family on, in the future. Loose sexual behaviour is regularly represented as the way to behave. The BBC are among the first to decry aberrant sexual behaviour in others, but the first to present it as a pattern for peoples’ lives. Recently, for example, even on the Radio 4 Today programme, a family, breakfast programme, a retired football coach was interviewed concerning his debaucheries. &#xa0;Stimulating Creativity and Cultural Excellence.  When one is talking about culture, one has to decide what kind of culture, and cultural excellence, it is that it is desirable to stimulate.  Over sexualisation and violence in programmes do not advance the cause of mutual respect between the sexes, but the tearing apart of society.  Culture - drama, music, literature, art - it always seemed to me, was there to help us to understand our human condition and react wisely and positively in our difficulties, and to be elevated and comforted by beauty, kindness and heroism. The culture of our country in earlier times did this. The BBC, even when presenting classics, does not now do this. The days of Pride and Prejudice, for example, embodying the values that the author intended, are over. In presenting classics the BBC is quite dishonest, ‘interpreting’ them in ways that are quite foreign to the intentions of the authors. In The Lion the Witch and the Wardrobe Mr Beaver was carping and rude about Mrs Beaver’s cooking (little boys learn how to be carping and rude to their mothers and future wives). In Sherlock Holmes I was shocked to hear the following, bad tempered, reply to some young children who understood that the dead went to heaven: “Of course dead people do not go to heaven. They get put into a little wooden box and burned” (there is no such thing as a happy afterlife, religion is bosh; violence is the only reality).  The recent Father Brown series was a travesty, and typical of the way the BBC now distorts famous names to present its own agenda and cultural values – which are those of anti religion (religion falsely portrayed), sex and violence.              Yes, the BBC is dishonest - in giving us biased versions of the news that will sustain a culture of anti religion, sex and violence. People, who were not black, it was said, did not notice the racialist attitudes that were endemic in society. People who are not Catholic do not notice the on going anti Catholic attitudes in the BBC. It can be very subtle or quite blatant. I was amazed recently to hear a good report about a Catholic priest (he had done a lot to bring together the warring factions in Northern Ireland) instead of endless reports about their bad deeds. Yes, there are priests who do a lot of good but we do not hear about them.               This anti religion attitude of the BBC and its biased reporting of events is tied up with its other cultural values. In January every year in Washington, D.C. there is a huge pro-life walk. At the latest there were about 600,000 demonstrators. Do we hear about it on the BBC news? The BBC reports on stem cell research not differentiating between research that uses - and destroys in the process - human embryos, and the use of adult stem cells.  The former, using embryos, of course, the Catholic Church holds as gravely immoral, and it is research that has given rise to no useful treatments but in fact has proved to be dangerous, embryonic stem cells being uncontrollable. Adult stem cell treatments have proved very useful indeed and are used in more than a hundred different conditions. The Catholic Church unjustly is made out to be anti science because it is against the destruction of human embryos as the source of stem cells.              Pro-life marches and adult stem cell research, of course, hinder licentious attitudes towards human beings and human sexual behaviour and violence towards the products of conception (babies – women are just ‘pregnant’ these days, not ‘with child’).               Since religion has a great influence on culture (we have only to look at the universities founded by the Church in the Middle Ages, the great cathedrals, the poems of Dante and the art of Michaelangelo, for example, to see this), an anti religious attitude profoundly affects culture and cultural values.  The BBC has no right to denigrate the faith and culture, particularly of our Christian heritage, especially where people of faith are obliged to pay for this denigration with their licence fee, the BBC thinking they are doing such people a great favour by allowing them the few hours of religious broadcasting (continuously under threat from the secular section, which greatly dominates the media already) that remain to them. Religion affects people’s values, morals, the stability of marriage and the family, and people’s respect for each other. Religion affects culture: culture affects citizenship. We have seen that the BBC promotes an anti religious culture of sexual licence and violence that is against good citizenship.&#xa0;The BBC is a very large organisation, having different departments, and the behaviour I have just outlined does not typify them all, as I have indicated. The Radio 3 programmes are by and large educational, enjoyable and sustain a responsible culture, but such departments are in the minority.              Summing Up.  &#xa0;It is important, it seems to me, to have a national broadcasting system funded by the people that like government, under God, is of the people, by the people and for the people. I am not against a system funded by a licence fee, it could be used to the great good of the nation because it is highly influential in forming the cultural values of society. As it is, large parts of the BBC are running amok.&#xa0;&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;