&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Stephen Hockman Q]]]

[[[C]]]

[[[ (CRJ 12)]]]&#xa0;1. I am Stephen Hockman QC. I am in practice at 6 Pump Court where I am Head of Chambers. I chaired the Bar Council in 2006. I have a long-standing interest in constitutional affairs, and am aware of and supportive of the Committee’s current work on “Mapping the path to codifying or not codifying the constitution of the United Kingdom”. &#xa0;2. Among the important reasons why this is potentially valuable work are that there is currently a lack of clarity as to the exact provisions of our constitution. It follows from this that there is also a lack of clarity as to when and how it is possible to change the provisions of that constitution, and indeed (even more surprisingly) a lack of clarity as to when and how it has actually been changed. Many may think that in a modern democracy there should be clear answers to these questions, and that in the absence of such answers it is inevitable that, to a greater or lesser extent, constitutional and political power will remain the preserve of a relatively small elite.  &#xa0;3.              The Constitution at present is a mixture of statute law, case law and ‘conventions’. Only scholars know where it is all to be found. They do not necessarily agree on what the current Constitution provides. This is undemocratic and elitist. British citizens, and not merely experts, should be able to know what the Constitution says. Codification would simply hold up to the light what is presently obscure.  Codification does not change the Constitution; it simply reveals what it is. Insofar as the current situation is unclear or vague, codification will reveal that as well. However, that is not a product of codification. It is the result of the present unsatisfactory and undemocratic arrangements.&#xa0;4.              The aim of codification, then, very much fits with these times of (party-) political disengagement and lack of public trust in most branches of those who officiate over us, (whether it be Parliament, the Police, the Banks or the Media), as one modest (in effect, though perhaps not in terms of drafting work!) measure towards increasing public understanding of, and participation and trust in our state institutions.  This can be seen through a partisan lens as giving those without power ‘a leg up’ against the elite, however, it is an aim that is capable of being cast in many different lights and I would hope it would have cross-Party support.  &#xa0;5.              It is important to note that the one institution of the state that has remained free of claims of corruption and scandal is the judiciary.  While I would personally welcome the involvement of judges in consultation on the practical details of codification and the working of a Constitution, and I think their involvement in this (insofar as they consider proper) would give additional authority to the exercise, I also stress that codification need not of itself enhance the role of the judiciary in interpreting the Constitution. Nor will it require special constitutional courts, or allow unelected judges to usurp the role of parliament. The judges, at present, have to construe and apply a body of constitutional law. Codification would simply mean that the sources of that law were all to be found in one place and were clear to everyone, subject, of course, to interpretation by the courts. However, the relationship between the courts and politicians would not need to change and one would expect that the judiciary would remain keen to avoid trespassing into areas of political controversy.  &#xa0;6.              It is often assumed that a fully codified constitution (in which citizens would find answers to the above questions) would have supra-legislative status. In other words, its provisions would like ordinary legislation have the force of law, but a constitution would have an even stronger status in the sense that (as in the US, Germany and some other countries) the constitutionality of ordinary legislation would fall to be assessed by reference to the constitution, and there would be a body (presumably a court and perhaps the Supreme Court) tasked with ruling upon the constitutionality of legislation, and the consequences in individual cases of non-compliance of the terms of a statute with such constitutional provisions.&#xa0;7.               It is, however, worth stressing quite strongly that although possible it is not necessary for a codified constitution to enjoy supra-legislative status. Under our current arrangements, although there is no comprehensive constitutional code, we do have at least two types of legislation which can be described in some sense as “constitutional” (and which according to some statements of the law in decided cases cannot therefore be subject to implied repeal). &#xa0;8.               First, there are many ordinary statutes which deal with constitutional issues and which have the same status, no greater and no less, than all other parts of the statute book. An example of this is the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 which is the current basis of the constitutional role of the judiciary and (following the reform of the role of the Lord Chancellor by the Blair government) constitutes the Lord Chief Justice as the head of the judiciary. &#xa0;9.                Second, there are of course a number of individual statutes which already have in some sense a degree of added status, although none other than the Parliament Acts are subject to any restriction whatsoever as regards express repeal. One example is the European Communities Act 1972, which had the effect of making the United Kingdom subject to EU law, and hence subject to the relevant rulings on the interpretation of EU law by the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg. In practice, Parliament would not repeal these legislative provisions without at the same time deciding to rescind our membership of the EU by withdrawing from our European Treaty obligations, these being a matter of international rather than domestic legal obligation.&#xa0;10.               Another important example, however, is the Human Rights Act 1998 which had the effect of incorporating into our law the European Human Rights Convention, the interpretation of which is subject to the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. What is important for present purposes about the Human Rights Act is that not only does it require public bodies generally including courts to act in a manner which is compatible with the Convention, but in addition it confers power on the courts to grant a “declaration of incompatibility” in respect of any statute which is incompatible with the Convention. These arrangements, which were widely regarded as a classic British compromise and were on introduction the subject of consensus across the political spectrum, have generally worked well, in that although a number of such declarations have been granted, in almost every case so far, Parliament has amended the law to address the issue. What is politically controversial about the Human Rights Act is not the constitutional mechanism it contains enabling the courts to issue such declarations, but the necessary constraints upon the practical freedom of Parliament to pass whatever laws appear to the majority in Parliament to be in the best interest of the country. &#xa0;11.               Against this background I would answer the Committee’s six questions as follows:&#xa0;(i) See above. If a codified constitution were to be accorded the same status as the Human Rights Act (which Act the constitution would almost certainly need to incorporate as one of its constituent parts), then there would be no change.&#xa0;(ii) The judiciary might well be hesitant to engage in consultation on political questions, but they have in recent times produced detailed written responses on various issues affecting the administration of justice, and the Lord Chief Justice, in particular, and other senior judges do give evidence in Parliament on a fairly regular basis.  On practical matters, as to how a Constitution would work, I consider they may be willing to assist especially if circumstances arise such that the codification process has cross- Party support.&#xa0;(iii) On the basis set out above the powers of the courts would change relatively little. &#xa0;(iv) No. &#xa0;(v) There would be no need for a separate constitutional court.&#xa0;(vi) I am not aware of any other jurisdiction in which our “British compromise” has been adopted. I know that there are wide variations in constitutional structures within different countries, and even within countries elsewhere in the common law world. Experience, however, in countries such as the US, Canada, Australia, South Africa and Israel shows that the judiciary by their very nature do contribute towards public confidence in our constitutional arrangements, but also (a) add to the rationality of the political process, since unlike those in Parliament they are required to provide detailed reasons for their decisions, and (b) have shown themselves to be vigilant in the protection of individual liberty and in the protection of sometimes unpopular minorities. &#xa0;29 November 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;  Note that rulings by that court are as a matter of domestic law non-binding, since the Human Rights Act provides only that such rulings must be “taken into account”; compliance with decisions of the European Court of Human Rights is instead a matter of the United Kingdom’s international legal obligations).