

[[[Written evidence submitted by the Children’s Commissioner for England (JRR 0037)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]1.              The Office of the Children’s Commissioner welcomes the Joint Committee on Human Rights’ inquiry into the effect on access to justice of the changes to judicial review proposed by the government in Judicial Review: proposals for further reform.  We are concerned that, particularly when considered along with the reforms to legal aid proposed in the Transforming Legal Aid consultations, they are likely to compromise the promotion and protection of children’s rights under the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) and other instruments.  The Office of the Children’s Commissioner has already submitted evidence to the Joint Committee on the legal aid changes; we here express briefly our concerns regarding two areas of the judicial review reforms: standing for judicial review, and the rules on third party interventions.  &#xa0;2.              The Office of the Children’s Commissioner is concerned at the government’s proposal to alter the test of standing for judicial review cases from the ‘sufficient interest’ test in s31(1) of the Senior Courts Act 1981.  The government’s consultation paper Judicial Review: Proposals for Further Reform recognised that the court, in determining whether the applicant has a sufficient interest, will pay attention to “the merits and degree of importance of the challenge, the likely absence of any other responsible challenger, the nature of the alleged breach and any role played by the person or group in question” and that “a strong public interest can provide standing even where the claimant has no direct interest”. &#xa0;3.              In an adversarial legal system, where the courts rely upon individuals to bring cases before them, requiring a direct personal interest in the outcome would mean that – even more than at present – those people, including children, who are most vulnerable and least capable of litigating on their own behalf are least likely to be able to challenge the decisions of public authorities that may affect them.  In particular, issues that may require judicial intervention or clarification of the law  – where significant breaches of human rights may be occurring on an ongoing basis – may go unchecked because there is no suitable applicant willing or able to bring the case.  In the context of children’s rights, for example, the case of R (Children’s Rights Alliance for England) v Secretary of State for Justice [2013] EWCA Civ 34   concerned the use of unlawful restraints on children in custody.  The issue in the case was that children lacked information regarding the illegality of the restraints – and therefore would not be aware that a cause of action existed.  In R (Howard League for Penal Reform) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] EWHC 2497 (Admin) – the case that resulted in the well-known ‘Munby judgment’ – the issue (here, the applicability of the Children Act 1989 to children in Young Offenders’ Institutions) affected a whole class of children and the ability of the Howard League to bring the case allowed the court to make this important clarification of the law and advance children’s rights without having to wait for an individual child to be willing and able to take proceedings. &#xa0;4.              Further, children who are particularly vulnerable to breaches of their rights – such as unaccompanied migrant and asylum-seeking children and children in local authority care - are less likely to have a litigation friend willing to act on their behalf and, for looked after children, their corporate parent (who may even be the defendant in any prospective action) may be unlikely to do so. In other cases the interests and wishes of parents may not coincide with those of the children.  Many (and in particular, particularly vulnerable) children will also find it difficult to obtain legal advice and assistance due to their circumstances – for example, children in custody, and because of the current and forthcoming impact of legal aid changes. They will therefore be increasingly dependent upon non-governmental organisations to take cases on their behalf. &#xa0;5.              In education law, for example, only Special Educational Needs cases now remain within scope under the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.  Other education cases, such as those regarding unlawful exclusions or admissions practices, remain outside the scope of legal aid.  Legal aid for judicial review remains available, but we are concerned that the lack of legal involvement at earlier stages means that children and parents (and indeed potential respondents) are unlikely to be aware that a cause of action has arisen and therefore are less likely to bring judicial review proceedings.  Even in Special Educational Needs cases, the limited nature of legal aid provision (3 providers, who must be contacted initially via a telephone gateway, the existence of which is not widely publicised) may have a similar impact.  Our School Exclusions Inquiry found for example, a ‘troubling uncertainty on legality and illegality among teachers’.  The implementation of the proposals in Transforming Legal Aid: Next Steps is likely to result in a similar situation for children in custody, in relation to judicial reviews arising out of prison law matters that will be out of scope.  &#xa0;6.              On interventions, we are also concerned that the courts will not be assisted in important children’s rights cases by submissions from organisations able to bring valuable information and legal analysis (in particular, relating to international human rights obligations) of relevance beyond the circumstances of the individual claimant(s) if criteria for interventions is tightened or if the rules on costs for interveners are changed resulting in costs becoming prohibitive, particularly for charitable organisations.   In her recent speech ‘Who Guards the Guardians?’, Baroness Hale emphasised the importance of child-focused interventions in the Supreme Court and House of Lords cases of H(H) v Deputy Prosecutor of the Italian Republic, Genoa [2012] UKSC 25, [2013] 1 AC 338 (where the intervener was Coram Children’s Legal Centre) and E (A Child) v Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary [2008] UKHL 66 (Children’s Law Centre and Northern Ireland Commissioner for Children and Young People), highlighting that there were useful points regarding the special vulnerability of children in the circumstances of those in the latter case that only those interveners had made.  &#xa0;7.              Article 4 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child requires the Government to:                                           [U]ndertake all appropriate legislative, administrative, and other measures for the implementation of the rights recognised in the present Convention.  With regard to economic, social and cultural rights, States Parties shall undertake such measures to the maximum extent of their available resources and, where needed, within the framework of international cooperation.In its General Comment No 5, the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child has emphasised that the availability of effective remedies to children is a crucial component of fulfilment of the state’s obligations in implementing the Convention.  The Committee also underlines the special status of children and the need for particular attention to this in ensuring that remedies are available to them.                             For rights to have meaning, effective remedies must be available to redress violations.  This requirement is implicit in the Convention and consistently referred to in the other six major international human rights treaties.  Children’s special and dependent status creates real difficulties for them in pursuing remedies for breaches of their rights.  So States need to give particular attention to ensuring that there are effective, child-sensitive procedures available to children and their representatives.  These should include the provision of child-friendly information, advice, advocacy, including support for self-advocacy, and access to independent complaints procedures and to the courts with necessary legal and other assistance.  Where rights are found to have been breached, there should be appropriate reparation, including compensation, and, where needed, measures to promote physical and psychological recovery, rehabilitation and reintegration, as required by article 39.              As noted in paragraph 6 above, the Committee emphasizes that economic, social and cultural rights, as well as civil and political rights, must be regarded as justiciable.  It is essential that domestic law sets out entitlements in sufficient detail to enable remedies for non-compliance to be effective.8.              We are therefore concerned that, particularly when viewed together with the legal aid reforms since April 2013, the effect of these proposals will be to lessen the likelihood of the courts providing effective remedies being available for breaches of children’s rights and furthering the integration of the UNCRC into UK law. &#xa0;September 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;3&#xa0; The Children’s Commissioner’s remit includes all children under 18 in England and young adults aged 18-20 who are care leavers or have a learning disability. She also has a duty to speak on behalf of all children in the UK on non-devolved issues which include immigration, for the whole of the UK, and youth justice, for England and Wales.  Office of the Children’s Commissioner (2012), Always Someone Else’s Problem: Office of the Children’s Commissioner’s Report on Illegal Exclusions’. Available at www.publiclawproject.org.uk  General Comment No 5 (2003), General Measures of Implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (articles 4, 42 and 44 paragraph 6). 