BRC39&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence ]]]

[[[on Part ]]]

[[[P schemes from Electroworks Ltd]]]

[[[Summary ]]]Part P while a good idea has a number of fundamental flawsI believe that one body should be in place to promote the use of qualified electricians and to access the competence of electricians. This should be backed by strong enforcement of a much strengthened Part P or equivalent similar to the Gas safety regulations. This would ensure that the individuals doing electrical work are competent rather than one person in a company and reduce the confusion of customers about what a qualified electrician is. 

[[[Comments]]]I speak as someone who with 40 years experience of electrical work who did not serve an apprenticeship and recently put myself through one of the accelerated training schemes (9 months) to pass all the qualifications associate with being an electrician. This was to ensure that my knowledge and skills were up to date and that I could prove that they were. It is therefore very disappointing to now be in business competing with Joe from the pub who knows a bit about electrics and Fred who is Part P approved as a result of a five day course and a simple assessment. I should also comment that while there were some very competent people on my course there were many who I would not let change a plug fuse for me and they managed to also pass at least part of the course..The person responsible for compliance with Part P is the householder but the majority of people I talk to do not know what Part P is. In addition there has been very little publicity about Part P and its requirements. I think I have only been asked twice in the last three years if I was Part P registered despite a large number of domestic customers. Some of my customers have been very concerned when I have told them I am going to inform Building Control about the work I have done. I am not aware of any prosecutions under Part P apart from the odd one where someone has also done illegal gas work and a Part P prosecution has been thrown in for good measure. There does not appear to be any one who is interested in enforcing Part P and Local Authority Building Control will generally allow an Electrical Installation Condition Report (EICR) instead of a Electrical Installation Certificate (EIC) which is what is required under Part P. The EICR is not a substitute for an EIC as it impossible to inspect an installation completely once walls have been plastered, ceilings installed and insulation put in and the limitations on a EICR reflect this. The scope of Part P has now been reduced to the point where it is almost meaningless.  So given the lack of enforcement I wonder how many people will now bother. The introduction of third party certification is rumoured that it is going to be an inspection by a certified person who does not need to be an electrician but will merely have passed a simple certification course. If true this will of course mean that there will be no need for Part P certification as anyone can do electrical work and then get it checked for very low fee.My main concern is the competing Part P certification schemes have confused the issue about who is a qualified electrician.  Passing a simple open book C&amp;G exam, having the right equipment, passing a simple assessment means and paying their fee means that you are now a Part P approved electrician. How many applicants do these schemes fail? When a customer complains about poor workmanship how many are struck off? How many customer think that they are getting a qualified electrician as a result. My view and that of many others is that the Part P schemes are in it to make money and quantity is more important than quality.  On a regular basis I see very poor quality and unsafe work done by DIYers, qualified electricians and Part P approved companies so the skills and knowledge required to be an electrician should not be underestimated.  Looking at the internet forums where Part P “qualified electricians “are asking the most basic questions about electrical installations I am astounded that they have the nerve to charge people for their work and do worry about how safe they are.  And these are the people who have the intelligence to realise they do not know what they are doing and ask for advice! Many people think that domestic electrics are simple and in the majority of cases they are right. But there are many instances where there is a considerable degree of complication where a wide range of electrical knowledge is needed to ensure that an installation is safe.I believe that one body should be in place to promote the use of qualified electricians and to access the competence of electricians. This should be backed by strong enforcement of a much strengthened Part P or equivalent similar to the Gas safety regulations. This would ensure that the individuals doing electrical work are competent rather than one person in a company and reduce the confusion of customers about what a qualified electrician is. 4 December 2013&#xa0;