&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Written submission from Ohms Law (BRC 43)]]]&#xa0;1. In answer to the select committees request, I feel the bullet points you raised are best answered individually. Please see my answers to your questions below. I am an Electrical engineer and have worked in the electrical installation industry for over 20 years. I am currently employed by an engineering entity and my view is my own personal view and not that of my employer.&#xa0;&#xa0;2. The general public as a whole do not understand Part P, nor realize the requirement for using a suitably competent person. In my experience that part of the general public actually having works carried out to their property may use various media to understand what they need to do to employ a contractor and in so doing pick up what Part P is about, but not really understand it, as many contractor web sites can be misleading. So, as advice is scant and misleading at best, I would say that only a small majority of the public are aware of Part P of the building regulations; however being aware of and understanding something are two very different concepts and most people don’t understand Part P of the building regulations. I have come across electricians registered on competent person’s schemes, that don’t understand the wiring regulations or Part P, so how could their unsuspecting general public clients possibly stand a chance.&#xa0;&#xa0;3. I feel that a large portion of the workforce pertaining to be competent and trained are way wide of the mark and wouldn’t consider a large section of those on competent persons schemes to be competent to carry out electrical installation work in general, regardless of that covered by the scope of Part P of the building Regulations. The proliferation of 3-5 day or 12 week training courses do not provide prospective electricians with the skills to become competent and sadly they are accepted on to competent persons schemes and left to “practice” on the homes of the general public. This is a truly shocking scenario. I have discussed this with scheme officials and they were concerned that they were almost forced to keep unskilled non competent people on their registers as the cost implications of losing the annual payment from them was not acceptable. &#xa0;&#xa0;4. The scheme operator’s used to send a field engineer out annually to inspect a supposedly competent person; however the work that was inspected was chosen by the contractor and ran the risk of being stage managed by the contractor, ready for the inspecting field engineer. In many cases the inspections lapsed to two years and now the schemes are rumored to be operating a risk based approach where by contractors may skip annual inspections for a number of years. The concept is flawed as one scheme provider runs a Qualifying Supervisor (QS) scheme, whereby the Qualifying Supervisor is assessed, annually or other, but the rest of the company, which could have multiple non skilled operators that are not inspected. This is a highly dubious practice and allows totally inadequate and un skilled persons into a dwelling to carry out work, the paper work for which may only receive a cursory glance by the QS, who may not have even visited site to view the work. It is a misnomer that an electrical certificate or report produced, proves that the installation has been installed correctly, in many cases the electrical test readings will not highlight poorly installed electrical systems or indicate the work that was carried out is in accordance with the building regulations.&#xa0;&#xa0;5. The two schemes mentioned are not required as a register already exists that will tell a member of the public if a person or entity is registered with a competent person’s scheme, the existing register can be found at: http://www.competentperson.co.uk/ , this register is already fit for purpose and no other is required.&#xa0;6. The register offered up by the Certsure alliance (Electrical Safety Council, NICEIC, ECA,SELECT and ELECSA), requires that any person accepted on to it is a member of, or registered with, one of their member bodies, therefore any person or entity registered with a non-Certsure group company, would not be accepted on to it. How then can it be the register for the public? It is merely a register of all of the people registered with Certsure and not a register of those people or entities equally competent and registered to carry out electrical work.&#xa0;7. The NAPIT register has all of the non Certsure registered bodies but also accepts the Certsure group members on to its register, however it is still a register and not required as the competent person scheme register, http://www.competentperson.co.uk/ is by far the most effective and neutral.&#xa0;8. One of the new registers seemed to be set up as a direct competitor to the other as the competition between competent person schemes can only be described as ferocious and volatile in nature. They are constantly attempting to discredit each other. I feel they are not working to the benefit of the general public with their new register folly, which they both seem to be driving very hard&#xa0;9. In short a new register is not required as a perfectly serviceable register already exists. http://www.competentperson.co.uk/10. I am not aware of any supervision what so ever by DCLG of the accreditation bodies. The experience I have had of DCLG interacting with the accreditation bodies was to ask for feedback and minimal advice on the recent changes to Part P of the building regulations. I see the accreditation bodies very much as individual companies and not answerable to DCLG in a way that can be seen as useful to the general public. &#xa0;11. To sum up, I don’t feel Part P has impacted the general public in a positive way, it has only served to enable scheme operator’s to prosper and develop well beyond their bounds. Vigilant monitoring of competency by a neutral body, not driven by massive profit requirements is what is required to improve safety and by doing so increase the skill levels of those undertaking electrical installation work by continual development.&#xa0;12. Merely taking circa £500 a year from a contractor to enable them to work is no use to anyone, especially not the public they are supposed to ensure the safety of.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;