&#xa0;

[[[Written Evidence from R A ]]]

[[[Wilce]]]

[[[ [CST0031]]]]&#xa0;This submission is made by me as an individual, and a former police officer.1. Are crimes being recorded by the police when they should be? Are crimes being categorised correctly?1a) No. During my police service (1988-2001) the underlying principle was to report all allegations of crime, regardless of your thoughts on their merit. They would then be classified as ‘crime’ or ‘non-crime’. If ‘crimed’, they would then be ‘screened in’ or ‘screened out’ depending upon whether or not there were leads to follow. If ‘screened in’ further investigation would follow. My experience (including working on a Crime Desk) suggests that, at this time, crimes were (on the whole) being correctly classified and screened. This had changed significantly toward the end of my police service – and was a major contributing factor in my decision to leave the police service.1b) In 2004 I was working with the NHS to reduce assaults on NHS staff. I clearly recall attending Marylebone Police Station near to Christmas in order to report assaults on NHS staff. I witnessed a police officer listen to a Spanish national make an allegation of robbery (his passport being stolen from his rucksack, by force) and then tell him that he would record it as being ‘lost in the street’. Immediately afterward a gentleman came in (at least an octogenarian) to report the theft of his Christmas hamper by his neighbour – the police officer told him it was a ‘civil matter’ and that he should speak to a solicitor. I was disgusted, but I knew that it was pointless to say anything as such action by an officer was now expected in the police service.1c) More recently I have suffered anti-social behaviour by youths, which was regularly reported to police by me and my neighbours. The police did nothing. Having witnessed the sale and supply of drugs, etc (in the churchyard next door) I again phoned police. They didn’t respond for over 15 minutes and so, when I witnessed a youth damaging the 14th Century church, I went out and arrested him myself, despite there being a gang of 15 youths. The police response was to (eventually) send two women PCSOs!! The police officers that did eventually attend were mightily cheesed off at having to take a youth into custody…..I haven’t heard anything more from the police about the result of the incident from that day to this and having been in touch with the Vicar and the the PCC, they had no knowledge of the citizen’s arrest or the damage – it would appear that the youth was simply ‘let go’ by police, despite first-hand evidence and a citizen’s arrest having been made.2. What are the factors which can influence police mis-recording of crime?2a) Currently serving police officers have told me that they are put under pressure by supervising/inspecting ranks not to record crime.3. Are the right checks in place to ensure that the systems for recording crime function effectively and accurately? No. The police are able to say that recorded crime has fallen only because they are the organization responsible for recording it in the first place.4. Has enough been done to ensure the integrity of crime data? What more should be done?4a) Independent monitoring needs to be in place which compares information received from the public by control rooms, to eventual outcomes. In my day, this gate-keeping function was undertaken by a Control Room Sergeant, who would not ‘close’ any incident where a crime had been alleged without a Crime Reference Number having been appended to the call Log. Nowadays, all you get is the Log number. For example, I recently called police to report an assault and false imprisonment in my employment as a County Court Bailiff. When I was on the phone to police, my captors released me and so the police no longer needed to attend immediately. I haven’t withdrawn my allegation of crime and the police have done nothing to follow up on the allegation.5. To what extent can policy-makers have confidence in the statistics which result from the recording of crime by police forces?5a) I believe that policymakers can have little or no confidence in the recording of crime statistics by police.6. Should recorded crime statistics be classified as National Statistics? 6a) Yes; and more scrutiny should take place as to what is ‘recorded’ and ‘reported’ crime.&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;