&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[BBC Watch]]]

[[[ [FBB]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[0041]]]]

[[[Executive summary:]]]a) The BBC consistently fails to meet its own Editorial Guidelines on accuracy and impartiality in its Middle East reporting, thus compromising its reputation as a trustworthy broadcaster.b) Such editorial failures are increasingly apparent on social media which is in rising use by BBC employees.c) The BBC consistently fails to meet its fifth public purpose with regard to its representation of the Arab-Israeli conflict and the Middle East peace process, failing to promote well-rounded audience understanding of these issues.d) The current system of self-regulation and the over-complicated complaints system are considered unsustainable by members of the public. 

[[[Introduction:]]]BBC Watch (http://bbcwatch.org/) is an independent project of CAMERA (Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America) which was established in October 2012 in order to monitor the BBC's coverage of Israel for accuracy and impartiality as defined by the BBC's own Editorial Guidelines. Since its establishment, BBC Watch has documented numerous breaches of those editorial guidelines and consistent failure to meet the terms of the fifth category of Public Purposes defined in the BBC's Charter During that time, BBC Watch has also been contacted by many members of the public with regard to the unsatisfactory BBC complaints procedure. 

[[[How well has the BBC performed in the current charter period in achieving its mission and public purposes?]]]1) Breaches of Editorial Guidelines on Accuracy:Failures to meet Editorial Guidelines on accuracy are alarmingly common. Those failures appear in written, audio and filmed BBC content and increasingly on social media platforms used by BBC correspondents which, according to the BBC, are subject to the same editorial demands. Examples of inaccurate information promoted on social media include:A false claim of an Israeli air raid on Gaza on 19/11/13. The misrepresentation of a picture from the conflict in Syria as having been taken in the Gaza Strip.Inaccurate representation of casualty figures.Inaccurate representation of cause of death of a Palestinian prisoner.Examples of inaccurate information in BBC reports include:Repeated misrepresentation of the Israeli view of the recent P5+1 talks with Iran – see here, here, here and here. False claims of a 'secret' detention in Israel.Misrepresentation of a criminal incident as hate crime.Historical inaccuracies in BBC produced content and on its dedicated educational website – see examples here, here, here, here, here, here and here. The significance of such inaccuracies is exacerbated by the fact that misleading articles remain on the BBC website as a 'permanent public record'. The repeated misrepresentation of the death of the son of a BBC employee in Gaza as having been caused by Israel (the UN established that it was the result of a misfired missile launched by Palestinian terrorists). Images associated with that widely promoted BBC story were later used at anti-Israel rallies in the UK. 2) Breaches of Editorial Guidelines on Impartiality:Promotion of political campaigns on social media by BBC journalists – see examples here, here.Repeated promotion and amplification of the agendas of politically motivated NGOs without due disclosure of their aims and agendas – see examples here, here and here.  Use of 'expert comment' without due disclosure of affiliations and political views – see examples here, here, here and here. 3) Public Purposes:The fifth of the BBC's Public Purposes as defined in its Charter and Agreement is that of "Bringing the UK to the world and the world to the UK". The BBC Trust's interpretation of that remit includes a commitment to "build a global understanding on international issues". With regard to the Arab-Israeli conflict, the BBC consistently neglects to inform its audiences of the scale of terror threats facing Israeli civilians. It frequently ignores incidents of missile fire at civilian targets and other terror attacks against them. It downplays the subject of Palestinian terrorism in general and has erroneously portrayed imprisoned terrorists as 'political prisoners' – see here and here.The BBC's representation of the subject of the Middle East peace process is frequently indistinguishable from that of the Palestinian Authority, with disproportionate – and frequently inaccurate - emphasis on factors promoted by the PA as 'obstacles to peace'. At the same time, factors no less relevant to the peace process such as the Hamas/Fatah split, Palestinian terrorism, official PA incitement and glorification of terror and Israeli security concerns are given considerably less coverage, thereby hampering audience understanding of the issue. BBC reporting from the areas controlled by the Palestinian Authority and Hamas is notable for its consistent avoidance of issues such as the oppression of minorities, women's rights, government corruption and the lack of press freedom. Remarkable too is the sheer scale of BBC reporting on Israel. Over the past nine months (March to November 2013 inclusive), Israel has consistently been in the top five Middle East countries receiving the most coverage on the BBC News website, despite the fact that much of the rest of the region continues to be plagued by political and military turmoil. One particularly worrying characteristic of the BBC's Middle East reporting has been its tendency to promote unchallenged conspiracy theories and propaganda produced by repressive regimes to worldwide audiences – see examples here, here, here, here and here. The past year has also seen several cases of the downplaying of antisemitism both in the UK and abroad by the BBC and moderation of antisemitic comments on the BBC's public fora has not infrequently proved to be inadequate. The BBC's decision to host a known antisemitic Holocaust denier on its Persian service is a cause for considerable concern and reinforces the impression that educational work on the subject of antisemitism is urgently needed at the BBC.  

[[[How should the BBC be governed, regulated and held accountable beyond 2016?]]]4) The BBC complaints system:BBC Watch receives considerable amounts of correspondence from the general public with regard to the BBC's complaints system. Many of those members of the public are frustrated by the system's labyrinthine nature, the difficulties they experience in navigating it and the often slow response time to complaints. Members of the public also express great dissatisfaction with the fact that the BBC is essentially a self-regulating body and that there is no possibility for impartial adjudication of complaints by an independent body. The material collected on this subject by BBC Watch suggests that many members of the public would like to see the establishment of an independent ombudsman to deal with complaints regarding BBC content and that the current system of self-regulation is unsustainable. &#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;