&#xa0;                                                                                                                                                          (RCH0023)&#xa0;Supplementary written evidence submitted by Ofsted following evidence session on 6 November 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;All Ofsted inspectors who are deployed to inspect children’s homes have a social care background. In the past four years Ofsted has recruited 54 new Social Care Regulatory Inspectors from the social care sector, 47 of whom are still employed. For context, the total number of Social Care Regulatory Inspectors is 135 (FTE).&#xa0;&#xa0;Lisa Pascoe was not referring that guidance – she was referring to this. Ofsted is unable to regulate effectively against this guidance for any providers although we can make recommendations against this as a good practice guide.&#xa0; As this guidance is released under the Local Authority and Social Services Act 1970 it is primarily aimed at local authorities. Given that it is released to local authorities we think it would have more impact if it spoke explicitly to local authorities as commissioners of services. &#xa0;We also think that there is lots of valuable information on here for all providers and &#xa0;it would be more helpful to the sector if this guidance was all contained in one place alongside the kind of guidance we would like to see in the new national quality standards. The current national minimum standards reference the statutory guidance on children who run away. We are only able to enforce against a breach of regulations. Where providers do not meet the NMS or follow statutory guidance we need to demonstrate that this is then a failure to meet a regulation. We will be much better placed to take enforcement action if there are new regulations that have more aspiration for children and young people and are more closely linked with the underpinning standards that are not based on a minimum standard.&#xa0;Ofsted would like to be in a strengthened position whereby all providers (whether local authority or independent) who are not providing good care or experiences for children and young people can be quickly and clearly made to improve with the full force of enforcement action and possible closure available. The proposal for regulations should effect this change. Ofsted would like to see a move away from the concept of ‘minimum’ and therefore move from something called NMS to something that is called ‘national quality standards’ or similar and has higher aspirations for children and young people. On this basis the standards would need re-writing. Ofsted would like to see some of the helpful guidance that is within the statutory guidance currently (as referenced above)&#xa0;moved into one place for all providers. This place would logically be the new national quality standards.&#xa0;Yes.&#xa0;Ofsted will be tracking individual children and young people’s experiences and having a much stronger focus on those children and young people placed out of authority including visiting children and young people living in children’s homes outside their local authority area. This is so we can see how well these young people are supported. We have no enforcement powers with local authorities but wherever we identify weaknesses we will make this clear in the report and clearly identify our expectations for improvement. Our management information evidence that is required for this inspection asks LAs to show that an out of area placement is being authorised by a senior manager and that includes the notification to that area.&#xa0;In individual children’s homes we will be able to test how well the home has undertaken this new duty and if it is a requirement in regulation we can take appropriate action where needed. &#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;