&#xa0;

[[[Written submission]]]

[[[ from the Electrical Contractors’ Association]]]

[[[ (BRC 69)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]The Electrical Contractors’ Association (ECA) welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Select Committee’s call for evidence.&#xa0;The ECA supports the comments made in the submission by Certsure. However, notwithstanding the ECA’s role in Certsure, we felt it important to make our own standalone response given our role as a trade association in representing the views of our 2,800 members, the broad scope of the Committee’s questions, and by dint of our experience in seeking to enhance safety and the quality of work undertaken in the domestic market.&#xa0;

[[[Summary of ]]]

[[[key ECA points]]]&#xa0;

[[[About the ECA]]]&#xa0;The Electrical Contractors’ Association is the UK’s largest trade association representing electrical engineering and contracting companies. Our members range from local electricians to national companies with several branches employing thousands. ECA members operate in the commercial and industrial sectors, as well as the domestic market. As such, they carry out a wide range of work from domestic heating and lighting to installing cutting edge, environmental control technology on major projects and buildings such as Heathrow terminal 5 and the London 2012 Olympic Park. Most of the large contractors in the UK are members however, the bulk of ECA members are small to medium-sized contractors.&#xa0;Our competent person scheme activities are now carried out through Certsure.&#xa0;Since its formation in 1901, the ECA has championed safety, quality and standards within the electrical contracting industry. This included in 1923, for instance, establishing a Guarantee of Work scheme to underwrite the work of its members as a guarantee to their customers, and in 1968, forming the Joint Industry Board with (now) Unite the Union to create a card to identify skilled operatives for the benefit of employers/consumers (which is required for those working in the commercial and industrial sectors). &#xa0;&#xa0;The public as a whole are not generally aware of the structure by which electrical contractors are assessed as competent. However, we note that among those who understand the need to use a competent contractor, there is strong brand awareness of the NICEIC brand in particular.&#xa0;We believe that the issue is wider – we need to educate the public around the dangers of electrical DIY and rogue traders, as well as leaving any domestic electrical jobs to a registered professional, so that they are always encouraged to seek a registered contractor in the first place. We need to do more work to understand how homeowners source contractors. In the majority of cases, this is likely to be via a personal recommendation that is not based on whether an electrician has been assessed as competent. Of the small number (10%) of domestic customers that do search the web, they may often do so through one of the number of unregulated sites that offer lists of traders that have not necessarily been assessed as competent.&#xa0;It was our intention as the industry trade body, working with the industry charity, to establish a third-party certification scheme operator in Certsure (replacing NICEIC, ELECSA and ECA Certification schemes) that could, through a single brand – covering 80% of contractors doing 90% of the work –fund better resourced campaigns aimed at promoting the importance of finding a registered electrician. Indeed, the ECA and the Electrical Safety Council have committed to surpluses going towards such awareness-raising activities.&#xa0;As is covered in more depth later in the submission, Certsure’s recent agreement with Napit to seek to develop one mark, underpinned by a register of electricians registered as competent, will help in this regard. Indeed, with the public more likely to recognise, understand and act on the basis of a third-party certification brand – as opposed to taking notice of the competent person scheme structure or the Building Regulations – we are confident of driving up electrical safety awareness around the new mark. 

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;Part P of the Building Regulations, through the competent person scheme operators, tests companies ability to ensure that safe electrical work is undertaken. As part of this, it assesses the training and experience of the key individual or individuals (known as QSs) within a firm legally responsible for signing off on electrical work in the domestic environment. QSs are assessed in their own right and are also responsible for the competences of others they oversee. This assessment process is sufficiently robust and individuals need to be able to carry out and manage electrical work safely and correctly in order to pass.&#xa0;Whilst qualifications designed for individuals to enter the domestic industry have existed for decades, the introduction of Part P has brought about an auditable trail for over 40,000 registered contracting firms across all schemes. Registration with Certsure, for instance, confirms that QSs hold the minimum qualifications and have been assessed as competent to undertake safe electrical work.&#xa0;When Part P was implemented, it allowed companies to obtain Part P status without the individual responsible for signing off on work being required to hold a qualification. Concerned about the implications for consumer safety and standards in the industry, the ECA sought to change this.The ECA, along with other competent person scheme operators, and the DCLG, sit on the Electrotechnical Assessment Specification Committee, which sets the standards for QSs in the domestic sector. (The industry’s professional body, the Institution of Engineering and Technology, acts as the Secretariat.) Through the EAS Committee, the ECA has played a leading role in the adoption of higher minimum standards for QSs, which came into force in April 2013 for new entrants and those moving jobs. This has ensured that partly trained operatives have cost effective routes to upskill to the current standard and gain a Level 3 qualification. We believe that over time these changes will allow us to raise standards in the industry by increasing the numbers of operatives to acquire formal Level 3 qualifications. &#xa0;In addition, we have also established a progression route for domestic electricians to be able to upskill to move into carrying out work in the commercial and industrial (C&amp;I) sectors. It should be noted that different entry standards exist depending on whether someone is working in the domestic, or C&amp;I sectors. In the C&amp;I sectors, where work can be of a greater complexity, all operatives have to acquire an (ECS) skills-card equivalent to Level 3 which allows them to work. Indeed, in our role of promoting standards, the ECA actually encourages domestic QSs to hold an ECS skills-card, which clearly shows an individual’s qualifications and demonstrates their licence to practise. We would support the adoption of this model (which already exists and is highly valued and endorsed by the industry and Unite the Union) as a requirement for QSs in the domestic sector. &#xa0;&#xa0;The assessment process is thorough and we do not believe it is possible for a contractor to pass the assessment if it cannot demonstrate how to carry out electrical work safely.&#xa0;In terms of the process of reviewing the performance of contractors, the Part P competent person scheme assessment requires that an adequate sample of work is taken to represent the activities of the contractor. Re-assessment is conducted annually through questioning and observation.  A feature of the assessment is that the work is randomly checked. &#xa0;These assessments are conducted by assessors who are themselves required to have achieved a level of competence in excess of that which they are required to assess. The competence of assessors is reviewed annually by the UK Accreditation Service and a regime of CPD is required to maintain their effectiveness and the consistency of all assessments.&#xa0;It is important that the certification regime reflects the range of competencies found across the domestic electrical labour force, and that it can ensure that works carried out under the scope of Part P comply with the Wiring Regulations – which governs all electrical work. &#xa0;&#xa0;After a notifiable job is carried out by a registered contractor, the contractor will notify the scheme operator which works have taken place via an online tool. This information is sent to the local authority for where the job was carried out, with the scheme operator also sending a certificate to the homeowner confirming who did the works and that the works comply with the Building Regulations.&#xa0;As noted earlier, a typical sample of the work that contractors perform is assessed on an annual basis. Experienced, UKAS-assessed assessors will conduct random inspections of this sample of work. They will check the work carried out and seek the correct justification for why the work was undertaken in the way that it was. As such, the assessment does not just check whether work has been carried out correctly in these instances, but probes whether the contractor still maintains the methodological basis for working safely and correctly.&#xa0;It is also critical to assess companies’ ability to manage work, as well as test their staff who are qualified to sign off on work, as we know that either in isolation is not sufficient.  &#xa0;From Certsure’s operations, we note that approximately 20% of assessments either fail the contractor or recommend corrections that must be adopted in the contractor’s way of working.  Common problems found through inspections are used to inform the production of advisory and training materials to create a virtuous cycle of safety improvement.&#xa0;&#xa0;It is important to note that in the majority of cases, domestic consumers choose an electrician on the basis of a personal recommendation (who may or may not be certified as competent). Of the small majority (10%) that choose to find an electrician via the internet, they may do so from a variety of websites, many of which, such as Checkatrade and Rated People (which are recommendation-based), are not registered under the DCLG’s competent person scheme. Indeed, we understand that Which? will also be launching a similar register. &#xa0;Many of these online registers belong to organisations that are not licensed by the DCLG, and some of which do not qualify their listed tradespeople based on technical assessment or competence. Of the current seven entities that are licensed to operate electrical schemes by the DCLG – including both registers currently operated by Certsure and NAPIT – the public can be sure that the contractors listed under these are assessed as competent.&#xa0;Despite this, we appreciate there have recently been concerns expressed over the potential for confusion amongst consumers with more than one register that references electrical firms registered under Part P of the Building Regulations. In order to overcome these concerns, a meeting was recently held between Certsure and Napit where it was agreed that they would seek to develop one easily identifiable quality mark, underpinned by a register of all full scope Part P registered electricians, that provides a single point of reference for consumers to refer to when seeking an electrician to do electrical work in their home.It is anticipated that the proposal will include all licensed Part P Scheme Operators in England and Wales who meet the new scheme requirements in line with DCLG’s timeline.&#xa0;Notwithstanding this development, we wish to explore the effect competition has had between competent person scheme operators to date. Indeed, we believe that competition has had some benefits for the electrician and homeowner. Scheme operators compete to offer low prices to contractors. This includes the cost of annual scheme registration paid by contractors and the cost per notification. We note that Certsure’s annual registration fee paid by contractors is £370, with a notification fee of between £1.50 and £3.00 per job depending on whether a contractor is on a scheme which offers an insurance-backed guarantee option. (All ECA members are covered under the ECA Guarantee of Work Scheme). This certainly compares very favourably to what some local authorities may charge to approve work, as well as saving the contractor time. &#xa0;The creation of Certsure has also allowed promotion of the competent person scheme to a level that Government may not have wanted to fund. This has happened as a result of the DCLG encouraging a competitive market in third-party certification.&#xa0;Indeed, we note that the Select Committee itself has recognised the benefits of the self-certification model, which has been run through a competitive competent person scheme framework. It was noted in the March 2012 report on the Building Regulations applying to gas and electricity that contractors save on time, effort and money, consumers have a point of redress, and rogue traders are not able to satisfy the scheme operators to be able to self-certify work.&#xa0;&#xa0;The DCLG supervises the accreditation schemes (includes other trades as well as electrical). It was stated in June 2012 that full compliance with UKAS accreditation will be a requirement for DCLG-scheme operators from 12 June 2014. However for the electrotechnical scheme (Part P), it is already a requirement and both ELECSA and NICEIC achieved their accreditation in 2002 and in 2008 respectively.  &#xa0;UKAS accreditation requires a tough assessment to ensure that the certification body has robust systems and processes in place to demonstrate how it satisfies the following requirements:&#xa0;(The above-mentioned DCLG authorisation criteria  effective from June 2012 for full compliance by 12 June 2014 requires all scheme operators to be accredited by UKAS against EN45011 for product certification. DCLG should, in the ECA’s view, stick to this requirement, as this demonstrates the confidence that UKAS has, through assessment and accreditation, of the various schemes.)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;