&#xa0;Written evidence from Michael Flint (CYS0076)I do not officially represent anyone other than myself but I would like to think I represent everyone who wants to live in a wholly better country.&#xa0;&#xa0;1. I do not live in England. I currently live in Amsterdam, Netherlands. I was, however, born in the UK and I am considering returning to the UK. Aside from other reasons not to return to the UK, after living in Amsterdam, cycling has emerged as one of the more prominent. 2. It would be naïve of me to claim that cycling is perfect in Amsterdam. On average 6 people die cycling every year. Consider that fact in tandem (unintentional joke) to the fact that 57% of Amsterdammers use a bike daily and it doesn’t seem so big. 38% of traffic movement in the city is by bike compared to 37% by car and 25% by public transport. In the city centre, 57% of traffic movement is by bike. Nobody wears bike helmets because they justifiably don’t feel in any danger. Pregnant women cycle, OAPs cycle and parents cycle with their children. This is not just a city/country where cycling is made safer by the government through clearly separated/raised cycle paths. It’s not just the fact that cyclists have right of way over cars at many junctions. It’s not just the fact that cyclists have their own traffic lights. Amsterdam and the Netherlands as a whole represent a culture of cycling. Transport=bike. 3. A cycle culture is better for everyone. It’s better for the environment. It’s better for the nation’s physical health. It’s better for national wellbeing. In my mind it’s indisputably a better way of living. Cycling makes people happy and is a key ingredient in positive society.   &#xa0;4. So one of the reasons I don’t want to return to the UK is not just because I’m afraid of cycling in my capital city but because I believe that the UK’s failure to embrace cycling is symptomatic of many of its other unpleasant features. An investigation into cycling should be more than an investigation into how to make cycling safer, it should be an investigation into how British culture can accept and raise cycling as one of its many positive attributes. 5. In the short term, don’t be proud. Go and talk to Denmark, go and talk to the Netherlands, Go and talk to Sweden. These countries know what they’re doing to a far far greater extent than we do. It will NOT be difficult to get an education in how to improve. Saving lives is the primary concern and these countries will help. The long term is harder to advise on. It will take time to create a culture of cycling such as is the current state in the Netherlands but making cycling safer can’t be a bad place to start. &#xa0;6. My presumption is this. The people who really control city hall will not allow a real revolution in cycling. While an increase in cycling decreases profit for companies blindly holding onto the power and money that doesn’t nourish them in any worthy way we will not have a revolution. If someone can convince BP to give up on the gas and invest in some second hand bikes there might be a more positive future for us.&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;