&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Graeme Thompson [FBB0051]]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;From Graeme Thompson, Trustee of the Royal Television Society and Dean of Arts, Design and Media, University of Sunderland.&#xa0;The North East of England developed a substantial TV and production sector between the late 1960s and late 1990s as a result of significant investment in local production by ITV Tyne Tees and BBC North East. &#xa0;Sadly jobs and commissions started to dry up in the early part of the new century as ITV pulled out of its studio complex in Newcastle and focused production on London. Ofcom meanwhile agreed with ITV that it could pull out of its regional programme production licence commitment. Jobs were lost and many media professionals were forced to move to London to find work. The BBC maintained its commitment to regional production with current affairs/documentary productions Inside Out and The Politics Show. &#xa0;2006 was a lowpoint for the region with the BBC’s decision to end its long running childrens drama Byker Grove – which had been a successful training ground for performers and production talent such as Ant &amp; Dec, Jill Halfpenny and Oscar winning director Tom Hooper. In the same year, ITV dropped its own long running North East-based drama Wire in the Blood.&#xa0;It is to the credit of the BBC, that executives recognized the significance of the gap left by Byker Grove. Another childrens’ show was swiftly parachuted into the region. The Revenge Files of Alistair Fury ran for just one series and offered work to production staff who had been previously employed on Byker Grove.&#xa0;The new team at BBC North in Salford – liaising with the local Royal Television Society and Northern Film and Media – decided to tap in to the region’s expertise in childrens’ production by moving Tracy Beaker Returns to Newcastle.  The decision was then taken to shift production of the ‘60s detective drama Inspector George Gently from Ireland to Durham.&#xa0;CBBC quickly built on that momentum and brought new childrens’ dramas Wolfblood and The Dumping Ground to the North East. They join the BBC1 period shopping drama The Paradise (filmed near Sunderland) and ITV police series Vera (filmed in Northumberland). The BBC invested more than £1m in creating sets at Lambton Castle for The Paradise. &#xa0;Northern Film and Media estimate these new television productions currently contribute more than £6m to the production economy of the region - £12,700 a day in salaries, accommodation and equipment hire.&#xa0;Director of BBC North Peter Salmon said he believed the success of the BBC move to Salford would be judged not on its impact around the North West, but on its ability to engage audiences and revive and develop programme teams in Yorkshire and the North East.The current level of television production in the North East proves the BBC is taking that strategy seriously. The corporation is also investing in developing new writers and new producers with projects including Jesting About - which aims to uncover comedy talent. One of the successes of that project is North East writer-performer Jason Cook whose BBC2 comedy Hebburn is into its second series. Executives at BBC North are currently in discussions with Northern Film and Media and other partners about bringing further projects to the region.&#xa0;Without the BBC, the North East television production sector would now be a shadow of its former self. It is the view of myself and many others in the region, that the BBC used its influence and resources to positively make a difference to a production sector and programme-making tradition which had found itself facing terminal decline. &#xa0;Seven years ago, London-based ITV, Channel 4, Five and Sky were unable to offer the North East production sector a lifeline. The BBC however recognized the value of making use of experienced production teams and location managers. And further realized the positive impact on audiences of making television from this region of England.&#xa0;This seems sensible and strategic use of the licence fee - which of course is partly made up of contributions from the two million people resident in households around North East England.&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;