&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by TV Licensing Watch [FBB0054]]]]

[[[Summary]]]Raise the issues:Why people in the UK are by law denied and deprived of access to live television programme services because they cannot afford to fund the BBC or do not want to fund the BBC.Why people in the UK are by law subject to legal sanction in UK courts because they cannot afford to fund the BBC or do not want to fund the BBC.Why people in the UK are denied the right to exercise personal choice of whether or not to fund the BBC as a normal private purchasing decision.

[[[Introduction]]]TV Licensing Watch are private individuals who monitor, blog and report on issues concerning BBC tv licence, the realities of BBC licence enforcement activities and  victims of the BBC tv licence enforcement regime.  As a consequence of the experiences of what we do we want to persuade Parliament that it is no longer appropriate that the BBC nor anyone else is funded by an enforced broadcast receiving licence regime.  That there must no longer be any criminal or civil sanction used against people who cannot afford to or do not want to fund the BBC.  Bring a permanent end of the by denial of access by law to live television programme services because people in the UK cannot afford to or do not want to fund the BBC. To end any form of enforced broadcast receiving licence regime.

[[[How should the BBC be funded beyond 2016? ]]]1In 2012, on behalf of the BBC, Capita TV Licensing brought 181,880 prosecutions and secured 155,135 convictions for tv licence evasion.  The number of prosecutions and convictions for tv licence evasion have been increasing year on year and for many years and show no sign of decline.  The figures speak for themselves.  It has become increasingly evident that this increasing trend has been going on for far too long and cannot be allowed to continue after 2016.  Arguably, there are as many reasons for people no having tv licences as there are people who are unlicensed.  However, the point has to be made that prosecuting and convicting people who cannot or do not want to fund the BBC cannot be allowed to continue.  Any pretence that enforcement activities carried out by Capita TV Licensing on behalf of the BBC in any way detect, prevent or reduce the “crime” of tv licence evasion have long since been exposed as false.  According to the BBC’s own figures approximately 3 million letters of varying degrees of threat are sent to unlicensed addresses each and every month.  That is approximately 2.6 million more unlicensed addresses than there are “no licence needed” declarations.  If the BBC are to be believed there are approximately 400,000 “no licence needed” declarations on record.   2There are as many reasons for addresses being unlicensed as there are unlicensed addresses.  However, may we suggest that a significant reason for the huge discrepancy between unlicensed addresses and no licence needed declarations is the simple fact that people just cannot be bothered with the BBC and its broadcast receiving licence any longer.  They have made what amounts to a private purchasing decision in the audio-visual broadcast market and decided that they no longer want to or need to fund the BBC.  People seem to have decided that what they do in the privacy of their own homes is no business of the BBC or Capita TV Licensing.  People are voting with their viewing habits, purchasing decisions, wallets and purses and turning their backs on the BBC and the BBC broadcast receiving licence regime.  People are rejecting the BBC and no amount of BBC enforcement by Capita TV Licensing will change it and seeking to criminalise people or subject people to a civil enforcement regime for what amounts to a private buying decision for products and services consumed in the privacy and intimacy of their own homes by people in an expanding audio-visual media market in which the BBC has a declining share is plainly absurd.3There is no logical reason why people in the UK should deprived of and denied access to all live television programme services on the bases that they cannot afford to fund the BBC and or that they do not want to fund the BBC.  May we point out that people who purchase products advertised on television have in essence paid to watch the commercial television channels concerned as those channels are funded through advertising revenues.  Under the present BBC tv licence regime people who have thus already paid in advance to watch/record live commercial television programme services are denied access by law to those services that they have already paid for if they cannot afford to or do not want to fund the BBC.  There is definitely no reason why such private purchasing decisions for services consumed in the privacy of the home should be the subject of sanction whether through criminal enforcement or civil enforcement for that matter.4Proposals to decriminalise non-payment of the BBC broadcast receiving licence by introducing a system of civil enforcement recently introduced in the House of Lords seem to us to be as fundamentally flawed and as nonsensical as the continuation of the BBC broadcast receiving licence. For example, parking was decriminalised and made subject to civil enforcement and the number of penalty charge notices issued by civil enforcement officers employed by private enforcement companies contracted by local councils increased exponentially with concomitant increases in the number of complaints about indiscriminate, vexatious and petty issuing of penalty charge notices for financial gain as well as the terroristic follow-up activities of bailiffs seeking payment.  5The main reason why penalty charge notices for non-payment of the BBC broadcast receiving licence are unacceptable is simple.  The activity of watching and or recording live television programme services takes place in the privacy of people’s homes.  Making what goes on in the privacy of people’s homes, the watching and recording of audio-visual media the subject of a civil enforcement regime is inappropriate, disproportionate and grossly intrusive for what is really a petty infraction concerning a private contractual matter to supply between customer and live television programme service provider.  6As intimated by the DCMS Select Committee request for submissions, the audio-visual media market has burgeoned with a huge variety of platforms which currently fall outside the scope of the BBC broadcast receiving licence.  Arguably, those audio-visual media platforms currently outside the scope of the BBC broadcast receiving licence should continue to remain outside the scope of the BBC broadcast receiving licence if the BBC broadcast receiving licence were to continue. The reason is very simple, despite the obligations set out in the Charter, the BBC played little or no part in the financing, development and content of such unlicensable audio-visual media platforms which numerically far outnumber BBC channels.  With the plethora of audio-visual platforms now available people are free to pick and choose where they source their public service content from.  There is no longer any rational argument to restrict public service content to the BBC and have an enforced private hypothecated television access tax levied by and payable only to the BBC to fund it.  However, any form of enforced television or live television programme service provider licensing regime is no longer acceptable in our view and the UK should follow Australia’s example and abolish any form of enforced broadcast receiving licensing.7However, numerically outnumbering the BBC in the way that they do, private channels offering unlicensable audio-visual content to the overall media market in the UK complain vociferously and with some justification that the revenues that the BBC are guaranteed through the combination of BBC broadcast receiving licence, taxpayer funding via The Treasury for various BBC broadcast receiving licence concessions (over 75, blind) in addition to the revenues of the BBC’s commercial activities through BBC Global and BBC Worldwide lead to the BBC structurally dominating and distorting the wider media markets and production facilities within the UK.8There are four basic models to fund the BBC: tv licence revenue with merchandising, format and content revenues (the current model): advertising, format, content and merchandising revenues only: voluntary subscription with format, content and merchandising revenues: combination of advertising, subscription, format, content and merchandising revenues.9Although it is not widely known, John Reith, first BBC Director General was against the BBC being funded through licensing revenue.  In 1922, John Reith preferred voluntary subscription and had no fundamental objection to the BBC broadcasting advertisements and receiving advertising revenue. However, he believed, wrongly as it turned out, that no company would be prepared to pay the advertising rates the BBC could demand and command.  However, Reith disliked the BBC licence revenue model and argued with the Postmaster General who did not believe that the Post Office should be in the business of collecting mere subscriptions. Reith was overruled and the BBC broadcast receiving licence was created as a consequence and although fundamentally flawed and regressive for the reasons John Reith cited in 1922 the BBC broadcast receiving licence is still current.10In our opinion, and in this submission as with many other submissions from private parties it can be difficult to separate opinion from fact in the matter of how the BBC should be funded post-2016, in our opinion the BBC should be funded by voluntary subscriptions paid by people who want to fund the BBC.  We believe that people must have the right to exercise their personal choice in making a private buying decision in the wider audio-visual media market.  If the BBC need to or want to supplement subscription revenues with other revenues from advertising, placement, content and format licensing and merchandising then they should be commercial decisions made by a fully privatised media company and be the subject and consequences of market forces alone.  In other words, that is the BBC should become a private commercial concern with business development its only commercial concerns.  Whether the individual potential subscriber buys into the BBC and its products, services and commercial ethos is the free will concern only of the individual concerned and not the subject of monitoring and compulsion through BBC enforcement or indeed any other enforcement processes.11The transfer from licence to subscription will involve huge restructuring for the BBC and I do not underestimate the task.  However, nor do I overestimate the task.  The task was not and is not beyond networks and services such as Sky, Al Jazeera, Russia Today, Japan Satellite TV, and numerous others freely available in the UK who successfully market their services and therefore exercise no compulsion but still operate viable, profitable media businesses from and for their customer base.  Nor was the subscription task beyond the mobile telephone service operators who are in state of permanent network and structural changes.  If private media businesses can do all of these structural strategic things successfully and still operate as viable businesses then so can the BBC.  The project would be on a similar scale to the ending of analogue services in the UK and may be fraught with difficulties.  How should the project be funded.  We suggest with the final years’ BBC tv licence revenue in 2015-2016 the rest of the BBC can fund itself through its commercial activities which, by the way, it already does and apply to the City for investment funds and issue shares to raise money for large scale projects the way any other plc would and would take the BBC back to its pre-Charter private business entity roots as the British Broadcasting Company Ltd.12It cannot be any longer legitimately argued that people in the UK who cannot fund the BBC or do not want to fund the BBC should any longer be denied access to all live television programme services as a consequence.  The argument deployed against subscription funding of the BBC by willing subscribers was and is that subscription excludes those with the least money to be able to afford the subscription.  The fact of the matter is that people are already excluding themselves from the BBC and all live television programme services in the UK altogether either through choice or fear because they cannot afford either the cost of the BBC tv licence nor the fines, costs and victim surcharges associated with being prosecuted and convicted for so called tv licence evasion.  Exclusion already happens under the present broadcast receiving licence funding model for and operated by the BBC.  Were the BBC tv licence to scrapped, and we firmly believe that the BBC tv licence and the Charter obligations cited and deployed as excuses for the continuation of the BBC broadcast receiving licence should be scrapped at the earliest opportunity, then people in the UK would still have access to live television programme services for which they would not have to pay a subscription for and not face the fear of prosecution and conviction because they were unable to afford to or unwilling to pay into the BBC and its broadcast receiving licence.&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;