&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Peter Weitzel [FBB0058]]]]

[[[Introduction]]]

[[[ ]]]This response is by Peter Weitzel, I am a chartered electrical engineer with over 40 years of working in the media industry for the BBC and others and with an involvement in Professional Societies in Film and TV engineering, Electronic Engineering &amp; Technology, Audio and the Television industry at large. I wish to particularly comment on the Role if the BBC as a Public Service Broadcaster in the service that it provides to the UK public and creative industries in the field of Technological advancement, Engineering Standards and Education of the technical creative workforce. &#xa0;What should the BBC be for and what should be the purpose of public service broadcasting?The BBC has enriched the life of the UK and the world by its cultural output and in the technological area has provided and should continue to provide leadership to broad ranges of Industries across the world. A civilised country requires some strong organisation which can embody all of its Culture no matter how diverse and be a force for education and bringing the country together.  The easiest way of doing is by Broadcasting where it is beneficial to have some organisations whose purpose is to promote culture, education, impartial news for the good of the public at large – the PSBs. The BBC has been for historic reasons the leader in Public Service Broadcasting – and, unlike some PSBs, has been inspired  by, and able to move with, the technologies thus ensuring that all can access its output in means that the individual listener, viewer or surfer finds convenient.  This cannot be left to the market alone as we seen by how some PSB have seen their role and have not made their content as available as the BBC (or anywhere near it!)  And there is a need for a Commercially independent organisation like the BBC in  a world where the  UK Largest broadcaster/platform operator  by Turnover also being the  UKs second largest ISP, and the UK Largest ISP being now a notable provider of TV platforms and content.  This can only get more complex and thus the is a need for a sufficiently  large and influential non-commercial publicly focused (and well-funded) Broadcaster within a PSB sector to serve those in our community who cannot afford the cost of Pay TV – and to provide a high quality Universally accessed free at  point of delivery Public service.It should be noticed that despite these large players the BBC whilst being a significant player in terms of income is still the largest spender on UK creative content as it has no shareholder to pay. The BBC is one leading organisation which can represent all communities of the UK and be a significant and most influential part of the Media continuum which is so varied – But only works because of the unique scope of the BBC and the way that it has (up to now) have sufficient income in a certain independent manner to carry out its public purpose, and to enrich our lives. &#xa0; How well has the BBC performed in the current Charter period in achieving its mission and public purposes?Are the public purposes in the current Charter the right ones? How might they change?I believe that the BBC Has fulfilled it public purposes very well and I think that they cover well what is expected of a PSB.As an engineer I would like to point out two of the Public Purposes where I can bring my own experience of the BBC to bear. 

[[[ ]]]

[[[(]]]

[[[b) Promoting]]]

[[[ education and learning; ]]]I note the great work that the BBC does Through the BBC Academy to promote learning and best practise in the creative and related technological industries.   I welcome the establishment of the newly formed College of Technology to carry on the great tradition of technical training undertaken at BBC Wood Norton.  As well as the initiatives across the BBC to provide apprenticeships in many career paths I particularly praise the BBC Technology Apprentices and Trainees in cooperation with other companies in the broadcasting field. As a member of SMPTE - the worldwide society for the technology of the moving image - I felt that it was typical of the BBC intent and need for collaboration that the College of Technology was launched in the presence of the SMPTE Executive Director and many members at a SMPTE meeting in November at New Broadcasting House. I felt honoured that the BBC had chosen SMPTE to be the forum to announce its new initiative.This activity of the Academy specified under Section 84 of the Agreement supports the UK industries in a way that no one else can and thus should be an activity which the BBC continues to provide.  I also would like to point out that there is a great shortage of younger people joining the engineering professions and thus I value BBC output on Radio TV and the web which explains science, mathematics and technology to the audience particularly to teenagers.  I applaud the BBC intent to promote Coding and hope that this can be as successful in making young people interested in the digital world (which is our future) as the BBC micro was 35 years ago – which raised the awareness of the UK as to Technology being our countries future.

[[[ ]]]

[[[(f)in promoting its other purposes, helping to deliver to the public the benefit ]]]

[[[of emerging]]]

[[[ communic]]]

[[[ations technologies and services and, in addition, taking a]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[leading role in the switchover to digital television.]]]I note the great success of the UK DSO and the contribution of the BBC and other bodies who have been instrumental   in making DSO a great success, and the continued work to develop through the air Television such as the widespread emission of HD services.  &#xa0;The BBC is the one of the few Broadcasters in the world who has the research and development as well as operational engineers and technologists covering a wide range of areas, and with a great depth of knowledge.  And the commitments of the BBC in the setting of open standards which make the technology   provide an ease and universality of use by the audience.  I must record great contribution made by BBC R&amp;D whose Brief is given by Section 87 of the agreement.  And also to the contribution made by the BBC at large in the drafting, setting, verifying and use of open standards. From personal experience I can acknowledge on the excellence and collaboration of the BBC staff on these activities – within industry groups like AMWA, DPP, DTG, EBU, ITU and SMPTE.   As the Technology gets more complex the contribution of the BBC in standards setting as a means of advancing the technologies of the media is greatly appreciated and should continue. Related to this is the education of the industry in these new technologies and standards as carried out by the College of Technology within the BBC Academy and the encouragement to BBC Staff to attend and speak at meetings and conferences of a technical nature. What scope, scale and remit should the BBC have? Should the BBC’s output and services be provided to any greater or lesser degree for particular audiences? What balance should be struck in what the BBC produces in-house, commissions externally and leaves entirely to others to create?As I outlined earlier –I see the creative strength and efficiency of the BBC is that it cover all aspects of the media. Thus it would affects the dynamic of the whole of the successful UK Media industries which not only provides excellent  entertainment education and  information to the UK (and world) public – but also sustains a very successful UK exports industry in Media ; programmes , formats and Technology. I welcome the bringing of the BBC World Service and Monitoring closer within the BBC Family – and have noted the improvements in world coverage to the UK and UK information to the world that this has brought, so meeting a public purposeThe BBC introducing the WOCC has been of great benefit to the independent sector and has increased they richness on our screens – But it is important for the BBC not to outsource all its production – because it is essential that the Commissioners have experts to consult and fall back on   who can actually do a (close to) excellent job if called up on to do. However to perhaps make the WOCC to not more than 35% from the 25% it is now may give the little more encouragement to the Indies without affecting BBC in house production. In Digital media and Radio the Indies market is less well defined but this may grow over the next Charter period. &#xa0; How have the BBC’s commercial activities during the current Charter fitted with the BBC’s public purposes and have they achieved an adequate return for license fee payers? What should be the aims, scope and scale of such activities beyond 2016?The Role of BBC Worldwide has been batted about by politicians – and has generally been made to fit more the BBC public purposes than making a return which can augment the License fee.  The suggestion to merge BBC Worldwide with Channel 4 was typical of the way in which BBC W is seen as a source of funding to be used as governments see fit. I would like to see BBC World wide take a more commercial view – but very mindful of the BBC indolence and PSB role - and increase its mission to put forward the UK in the world of commercial media. What role should the BBC play in developing technology and new ways of distributing content?I see that the BBC contains within the one organisation technical staff (who I have had the pleasure of being my colleagues) who &#xa0;&#xa0;Thus the BBC has a range of expert knowledgeable technological staff working for a varied organisation which by its public service requirements , including universal delivery, means that the UK Public and the wider World audience are much cost effectively served to receive and easily access BBC content – by broadcasts and the internet.  &#xa0;It would be very foolish to break up an organisation  which has these End to end technical skills so the BBC Should continue to have the capable staff and authority in its charter to  develop technology and new ways of providing the audience with content. &#xa0; As a lemma I feel that a lot of the Failing of the Digital Media Initiative after its successful prototype deployment in BBC Scotland by Siemens is due to the move to IT based staff who were not expert in, and did not have understanding of, content and its creators or how the wider broadcasting industry had moved&#xa0;How should the BBC be funded beyond 2016? Is there a case for distributing funding for public service content more widely beyond the BBC?What comparisons can be made with the provision of public service content in other countries? I feel that that the successes have been achieved by the role and funding that the BBC has had for many years, and the role that the BBC has within the complex UK Media markets. Any Large change to the scoping or funding of the BBC may cause instability which destroys the UK's unique Media mix.I still feel that the license  fee as a method is still the most appropriate as the means of deriving a large part of the BBC income – as BBC services are freely available  for everyone to receive enjoy and benefit from.  It is sad that it is such an emotive subject when the average household spends more than even a realistic (say £200/year) LF on each of broadband and Pay TV provision – collectively at about 3 times what they pay in License fee  Although I think it was appropriate that the BBC should have funded the DSO Help schemes – I think that the fact that the underspend was returned to the Consolidated Fund was not an honest use of that money. Likewise while I feel that the UK needs to expand the reach of Broadband to remote communities - This is a matter of wider Public policy that just PSB and this top slicing of the LF to provide this is an abuse of the trust that the viewer has in the license fee.  The same may be said of the start-up cost of Local TV   All of these three subsides are to with 

[[[technological matters]]] – rather than content, which is the life blood of the BBC and what I think the public thinks that Their license  fees should support.  So I congratulate the way in which the BBC though partnerships is making its money available to partners like the Museums and National Performance orations to promote their worth though the airwaves and internet. Likewise the support that the BBC gives S4C MG Alba and the purchase of material from Local Television are useful interventions to support the none (or less) commercial element of PSB.How should the BBC be governed, regulated and held accountable beyond 2016?In a constantly evolving communications environment, does a 10-year Royal Charter and Agreement with the Secretary of State, together, provide the most appropriate constitutional framework for the BBC? The existing Charter has been shown to split responsibility between the BBC Trust and the Executive which is NOT good and has in part been responsible for much of the alleged BBC excesses. Thus a new charter must give a greater clarity and perhaps a slightly heavier touch monitoring of operational management whilst still being an arm’s length controlling body. There is a place for the Trust to preserve the public interest and to ensure clearly visible independence from Political or commercial pressures.  OFCOM as solely a regulator cannot do this. As for the period of the charter I observe that although the communications technical environment appears to be changing fast – many of the techniques are currently known, in many cases due to the pioneering work of the BBC whether in DVB-T2 or UHD2, or IPlayer and Television Adaptation Layer. &#xa0;The one technological change that will occur over the next ten years is that more content will be delivered over IP to provide a more personal viewing experience – But the very efficient and mass universal reach of through the air Television will still be the most important delivery platforms. The development cycles of many of these technologies approaches ten years from the first idea being demonstrated to the widespread take up of the technology by the audience and thus a period of much less than 10 years may not provide the forward looking view of the media and its technology. Although the BBC Is, and should be in the future, an innovative content provider – over the period of  a ten year charter  Broadcasting will still exist and the breadth of the BBC offering as the majority TV and web PSB and the sole Radio PSB seen to meet the public good. I hope that the new charter will give the BBC itself the space and incentives to develop and react or lead the changes which the Population of the UK will demand – as they use and exploit technology for the public good. The BBC has changed over any period of its life – it must be given the funding and governance to allow it to do so accountably to the Public – of the UK who fund it and the world who use it. Finally I recognise the creativity, determination and impartiality of the BBC staff and contributors who are what have made the BBC over the years – and form the best and very accountable broadcaster and information disseminator in the world. It must not be allowed to be destroyed. &#xa0;December 2013 &#xa0;