&#xa0;

[[[Written Evidence from Edmund Cavendish [CST0032]]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Massaging Crime Figures]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;I am prepared if necessary to attend and give the below sworn testimony before the committee.&#xa0;I am a former police officer having 17 years service retiring some time ago. In all my years and I won't say which force I served in because I believe such massaging is the norm across the board, I never worked at a division or police station that did not systematically fiddle the crime figures. I am not exaggerating to say that if an outsider such as yourself or even a traffic warden were placed in charge of a police division and it was your intention to reduce crime it could be done easily and no one would be the wiser. Governments of all shades are also complicit not wanting to show increase in crime figures. Although I retired some time ago some procedures may have changed but the ethics will not have.&#xa0;In the early 1980s the Home office introduced a new rule that anything under £20.00 such as criminal damage or whatever was not to be now considered a crime. In future such matters were to be recorded on a minor report form and filed. Nobody read them after the officer competed the form and it was simply filed and after a time disposed off. That the damage may have been a deliberate and wanton criminal act was irrelevant. I do not know if such a system still applies today but £20 in the early 80s was a lot of money.&#xa0;Even this was fiddled. If a car was vandalised to the extent of even £I 00 the CID would simply state that if the person repaired it himself or a smashed window obtained a replacement and did the repair himself he would not have to pay any labour costs. Endless windows were smashed by vandals especially home windows and the cost always estimated by the CID came to less than £20.00. Even if the damage was to a pensioner's window the CID would simply state that she only had to pay for the costs of the glass and arrange for a friend to fit it. That the pensioner was alone was irrelevant.&#xa0;If the person was a council tenant then as a rule no crime report would be submitted because as the CID argued that they the occupant are not the injured person as it is the council who suffers the loss and it is up to the council to make a complaint. The council cannot pursue every single case of damage as it means statements have to be taken and attendance at court with the endless delays would make it prohibitively expensive. Unless the council contacted the police it would not be reported as a crime: end of story. Thousands of crime disappeared this way.&#xa0;Pinching a tax disc from a car by smashing the window though not prevalent was not unknown and the CID would firstly say that as above that a replacement could be bought for ex number of pounds less of course than £20 from a scrap yard and secondly that there was no evidence that the tax disc had been stolen as it may have simply blown away? As for replacing the window the CID always argued that it could be replaced by the complainant so that there was no expense involved in labour costs.&#xa0;Attempted burglaries were like other matters dropped in stages to become not even a reportable offence. If nothing was stolen and even though there was damage over the £20 damage in attempting to gain access to the house the CID would drop the amount of damage and then simply write it off as a minor incident and not even an attempted burglary at all. There were many burglaries in one street at my last address and the residents requested the crime figures. None of the burglaries were recorded even though one of the residents was one of those whose house had been burgled.&#xa0;A lot of crimes were not allocated a crime reference number so not recorded at all. It was standard practice to take the initial burglary report but not get a crime reference number especially if they the CID could get away with it; in other words if the householder was a vulnerable person such as a pensioner or unlikely to make an insurance claim. The initial report along with many others was kept in a separate box and if nothing was heard after a few weeks it went in the bin. Assaults are categorized in stages of seriousness in stages and it was always standard practice to drop them down a number of stages until by the time they went to court they were of no substance whatever and more often than not they never went to court.&#xa0;If a particular premises as is the norm for instance a school would be systematically targeted especially through the holidays if not as I recall almost on a daily basis for vandalism or burglary that particular school would be allocated a single crime reference number 

[[[for the whole year. ]]]No I kid you not. No matter how many burglaries or amounts of damage caused on many separate occasion there was only one crime reference number. It is not an exaggeration to say that at that one school there were hundreds of crimes though only one crime referent number for the year.&#xa0;This at times simply did not apply to schools only and some shops in particular were systematically targeted by burglars or systematically had their windows smashed. I mean plate glass windows costing even then thousands of pounds and were only ever recorded as a single crime.&#xa0;Sexual offences were also dropped from something grave to absolutely nothing. There was also an abhorrence even all those years ago even then to avoid at all costs expanding sexual offences such as when a young girl complained of indecent assault or whatever and may have been from a children's' home and also mentioned involvement in 'other matters with gangs'. I remember to this day the senior CID officer's words 'We're not having any of that here' when a young runaway girl reported a catalogue of sexual crimes against her and involvement with gangs. Officers would only deal with what was absolutely necessary and under no circumstances whatever deal with what may be a catalogue of sexual crimes so no further inquiries were made.&#xa0;The easiest way to cut crime figures was to get a suspect 'to cough'. This meant getting him to admit any number of offences for which he had no knowledge whatever. It was not unusual to get a person to admit countless, even hundreds of offences. If my memory serves me correct I still remember the headlines of the local press when a suspect supposedly admitted more tan one thousand offences!&#xa0;You would do well also to look at the detection rate. To even use the word detection conjures up CID sleuths working their magic to rely on local information or informers or brilliant deductions as in Sherlock Holmes; not so. Did you know for instance that if a person is mugged or a house is robbed and the person knew the perpetrator and identified them to the police that that counts as a police detection? I bet not. In addition say for instance a house was broken into and fingerprints or DNA left that identified the culprit that counts as another detection. I'll bet that if the detection rates were scrutinised the real figure would be in the low single figures, that is detections found through interviews of suspects for instance.&#xa0;All this fiddling was for very simple and plain reasons;&#xa0;&#xa0;It meant anyone with ability was dumbed down and seen as a threat to climbers and was as a rule sidelined. On the other hand if you were a congenital idiot and your face fitted your career was secure. I once stopped and searched a man who aroused my suspicions and found on him a cash bag containing over £720 cash. That was in the early 70s. That day a new officer either a senior officer's son or family friend has started at the station and he was due to spend some time indoors learning various procedures. Officers were grovelling around him.&#xa0;When I took the prisoner back to the police station he was taken from me and handed over to this new officer who as reports later stated made a brilliant arrest on his first day even though he had not left the station; and to cap it all in the event won a police commendation. Can't do much better than that can you; a police commendation on your first day. His future was secure. It was also not unusual for me to bring a prisoner back and I would be told to resume patrol and the prisoner would be let loose and for all paperwork to disappear.&#xa0;Throughout corruption was the norm and quite open but that is another story. It is not just the conspiracy of silence that is damaging but the 'conspiracy of custom'. Officers start off right but are indoctrinated by the culture and slowly but surely corrupted. It was no secret which officers were corrupt in all manner be it drugs or burglaries. For instance if a shop was burgled and the culprits escaped it was not unusual for officers to help themselves. Even if they brought the goods back to the station and divided them out it never raised an eyebrow. Heavy drinking was the norm across the board with officers on duty as officers would visit particular premises who knew they were secure form being raided for whatever reason.&#xa0;The incestuous nature of the police meant than any officer known to be involved in criminal activities was untouchable. Few officers in fact even expressed any concerns as it had become standard so as not even to be worthy of a mention. I knew one senior officer with a passion for pornographic movies and they would be often shown at the station. These movies were more often than not from suspects when people had been arrested.&#xa0;It was standard for when goods were seized to share them out with fellow officers, this applied also to seized drugs or whatever. The prisoner never complained as he would be facing charges of lesser amounts but even so they 'know the score', that is that this is part of normal proceedings and goes with the territory. This officer with a passion for pornographic movies rose to 'a very, very senior position'. As a rule corruption only comes to light from an outside source and never ever from inside even though such behaviour is common knowledge.&#xa0;One of the most corrupt officers I knew who was dealing drugs and all sorts was transferred to the equivalent of the police complaints department investigating other officers. Nobody commented on this as likewise we knew the score and it simply went with the territory.&#xa0;To obtain a better use of resources would be to design new shift patterns. You are aware of the furore from the police federation that ensured when it was suggested that shift patterns should be changed. Ever wondered why? Because of what is known as 'early darts'. On nights for instance (llpm -7am) when there may be as many as ten men on duty one once it is quiet after say for instance 3am as many as six may be allowed to go home. This abuse was repeated on all shifts. There should be a 7pm to 3am shift. On the morning shift half the officer instead of starting at 7am would come in at l0am.&#xa0;Probably the greatest waste of resources is the fact that once an officer is outside their two year probationary period he effectively retires and for many they are neither use nor ornament from that moment on. There are also far too many chiefs and not enough Indians so that after promotion from sergeants and above they lose the power of arrest and would seldom if ever dream of reporting or stopping a motorist even for such an offence as using a mobile phone when driving or drunken driving.&#xa0;If you can ever get to look at the arrests sheets for say six months at any divisional station and see not just how few arrests there are but also that so many officers don't arrest at all. Likewise if you could get the figures on motorists reported for using a mobile phone for instance there would be very few. And yet you know yourself when you are driving you see this so many times. The list could go on and on and on and on but you get the picture.&#xa0;

[[[Before God I kid you not saying this. ]]]One evening because of the stupidity of shift patterns I was the only officer on night duty (the next night there may be six) at the station on outside patrol. There were two Sgts on duty though they never ever came out. They had allocated a constable on the inquiry desk though they could have done it themselves. So three officers were inside the station and they never ventured out once even when I attended a number of domestic disturbances plus the other usual calls and if you had a few visitors or a few phone calls that was busy on nights.&#xa0;Throughout my whole service rest days and the rest day roster was allocated to the admin department. When an officer arrived he was allocated to a particular roster on that shift. With officers coming and going rather than reallocate officer to different rosters to balance the roster out it was not unusual on one day to have just a few officers on duty and the next countless officers. We might have ten officers on duty on a Tuesday bit only four on a Saturday and this was repeated over and again. Any hint of even a suggestion to balance out rest days was seen as a personal attack on established principles and the admin staff.&#xa0;At the other station in the division at our end of town there three Sgts and I think that night two officers on outside patrol and one on the desk. At that station also worked the sub-divisional inspector. There were 10 officers on duty and only two-or three outside on patrol. Sgts or inspectors would never dream of turning out to help even in an emergency.&#xa0;The greatest cause of waste and the most contentious is productivity but that does not mean it cannot be tackled. Officers on a daily basis go to extraordinary lengths to do as little as possible. Taken together with the vast waste of money on non-productive constables and officers from Sgt upwards and the pension fiddles of a number of promotions shortly before retirement to increase the pension the opportunities to cut expenditure are great.&#xa0;&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;