&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Channel 4 [FBB0067]]]]IntroductionThe UK’s Public Service Broadcasting (PSB) ecology is extremely diverse and draws on a range of different business models, and it is this diversity which has led to the UK becoming a world leader in broadcasting, providing UK viewers with a wide range of high quality programming from a variety of sources.This ecology includes Channel 4 as a publicly owned not for profit organisation, funded entirely by our commercial activities, taking no public money. Our not for profit status, combined with our statutory remit and business model, means that we automatically reinvest revenues back into the production of content and the delivery of our remit. We believe this is an extremely effective and efficient model which drives innovation and experimentation across the broadcast sector, as well as the on-going success of the UK independent production sector.  The BBC has an entirely different model being publicly owned and entirely funded by the British public through payment of the licence fee. We believe the continued existence of both these models of public service broadcasting, alongside the privately owned and privately funded models operated by ITV and Channel 5, is vital to maintain investment in UK produced content and to ensure UK PSB remains the envy of the rest of the world.The BBC, as the largest and best funded PSB, forms an important part of the PSB ecology in the UK and Channel 4 believes that a strong BBC is important for maintaining the strength of PSB in the UK.Channel 4 notes that the BBC’s formal charter review is due to take place in 2017. We plan to engage with that process and will respond to any consultation in due course. The answers given below therefore represent Channel 4’s high level, initial thinking on the BBC which may evolve when we engage with the charter review process in more depth in the coming years.The Purpose of PSBPublic Service Broadcasting (PSB) is the cornerstone of the UK media sector. PSBs invest over £3bn/year in UK content and attract over half of all TV viewing. This significant level of investment supports the hugely successful independent production sector as well as a strong in-house production force, nourishing creativity and enabling producers to take risks and try new things. This has made a significant contribution to the UK economy. The British independent production sector is the envy of the world; according to PACT’s latest annual television exports survey, sales of UK television programming totalled £1.224 billion during 2012, a 4% increase from 2011. The competition provided by the mixed PSB ecology has also encouraged increased investment by other commercial broadcasters, for whom UK originated television is now seen as an important selling point. PSB is also a cornerstone of British cultural life – whether through impartial news or access to high quality drama, comedy or documentaries. Channel 4’s unique remit ensures that it provides audiences with distinctive, innovative content that challenges established views and promotes new perspectives. Channel 4’s commitment to championing alternative voices and fresh perspectives is exemplified by the huge success of the 2012 Paralympics, which demonstrably changed British viewers’ attitudes towards people with disabilities. It is clear that UK PSB is a powerful force both for the economy as well as for social and cultural good.  The difference between UK PSB and PSB found in other countries is striking. In some countries PSB content can be seen as dull, worthy or niche. This is a stark contrast to the UK which, thanks to the diversity of the PSB ecology, blends traditional PSB content with more commercially successful content drawing viewers, and enabling PSBs to experiment and innovate with new formats and programmes. The foundation of PSB is universality and its availability on Free to Air (FTA) Digital Terrestrial Television (DTT). The ability for viewers to simply plug their aerial into their TV or buy a set top box and receive the full range of PSB content free at the point of use is vitally important and given Ofcom’s conclusion that no other platform will be able to deliver these key features in the foreseeable future (Ofcom measure this as 2030) it is absolutely vital that the DTT platform is supported by government and allowed to continue to evolve and innovate.   Clearly, as its largest player, the BBC is a vital part of the UK’s PSB ecology. As the recipient of £3.6bn of UK taxpayer money every year the BBC has a clear responsibility to deliver excellence, value for money and to always do what is in the best interests of the licence fee payers.Scope of the BBCOutside of its specific mission and public purposes, it is important to look back at the expectations and prophecies being made at the time of the last Charter. It was said that due to the economic downturn and changing viewer behaviours TV (particularly traditional linear TV) would face particularly hard times and may even cease to exist as we know it. These prophecies turned out to be false, and indeed viewing of linear TV has actually risen, now standing at 4 hours per day. This is largely down to the continued investment from PSBs, despite the downturn, in delivering excellent content that consumers want while also continuing to develop the DTT platform, developing a connected offering in YouView and making content available after original transmission on a variety of on demand services. The BBC, as the largest PSB, had a big part to play in this success.The BBC has performed well in the current charter period and has delivered on its public purposes. Alongside provision of high-quality content and services, there was demonstrable success in its involvement in the Digital Switchover, for which a portion of the licence fee was used to ensure minimum disruption to consumers. Broadly speaking, Channel 4 believes that the public purposes as laid out in the existing charter are the right ones, but it is important that the BBC recognises its role in the broadcasting ecology, and that it focusses on its own distinctive role and strengths, rather than attempting to be  ‘all things to all people’. In 2010 the BBC strategy review laid out a series of core principles, which included “doing fewer things better” and maintaining distinctiveness. Channel 4 believes that these are still appropriate goals for the BBC.  The BBC excels at things like mainstream news provision and original children’s programming in ways that other broadcasters with fewer resources cannot, but there are clearly areas (such as reaching younger audiences or challenging established views) where others may be better placed than the BBC to deliver excellence and better value for money. While PSBs are in competition with one another for viewers and in some cases for advertising revenue there are many cases where working together would enable greater investment in content and services for our viewers and greater value for money from the licence fee.Channel 4 believes that the BBC should seek to partner more with fellow PSBs especially in the case of developing technology and distributing content. The BBC spends many millions of the licence fee on research and development, much of which is focussed on their online proposition and on the iPlayer while other PSBs also develop their own broadly similar propositions in isolation from each other. Were the BBC to partner with other PSBs and share technology it would doubtless save PSBs significant amounts of time and money which could be reinvested back into content budgets, benefitting viewers, the production sector and the PSBs.As the largest PSB the BBC should also take a lead role in ensuring the continued strength of PSB across the wider ecology and should look to work with other PSBs to ensure the ecology as a whole can continue to flourish. The BBC should also have a responsibility to promote the availability of FTA PSB and ensure the DTT platform on which it relies remains strong and competitive. Channel 4 believes that it is vital that the BBC’s role, functions and range of services are clearly defined and proper processes are in place to manage it. Broadly speaking the right framework for this is in place but it is essential that it continues to be strictly applied.It is also important that there are regular checks and balances to ensure that the BBC’s scope and scale remains appropriate and that the correct processes remain in place to check the impact of new services the BBC launches. This is important both to ensure the effectiveness and value of the service and to ensure that they do not harm competition. As part of the process to review the effectiveness and value of their services the BBC should also retain the option of closing services which it does not consider to have been successful. The BBC is designed to serve the needs and interests of the entire nation, but occasionally this causes problems. The BBC could be accused of spreading itself too thinly, or attempting to be all things to all people. While appealing to the nation as a whole is a key part of the BBC’s mission it should not seek to serve the needs of niche groups at the expense of serving the needs of the wider population. This is especially the case where other PSBs have remits specifically designed to cater to these audiences. This does not preclude the BBC from focussing its attentions on reaching larger groups which are historically under represented, such as older audiences or children. As the largest PSB, funded by licence fee payers from across the country, the BBC also has a responsibility to deliver nations and regions programming. The BBC is in a strong position to do this thanks to the breadth and depth of its in house infrastructure while Channel 4 is dependent on the strengths and weaknesses of the independent suppliers in each nation and region. Unlike the BBC Channel 4 does not produce any in-house content. Instead we commission all of our content from independent production companies. This model has led to massive growth in the independent production industry since Channel 4’s creation, with Channel 4 effectively acting as an “angel investor” for production companies with a good idea. That idea is pitched to Channel 4 and then developed, in partnership with Channel 4, into a programme. In 2012 Channel 4 worked with over 450 different independent companies, and invested £434 million in UK originated content (our highest ever). In 2010 Oxford economics estimated that Channel 4 supported 28,000 jobs across the UK and contributed £1.1bn per year to the UK economy.The BBC currently commissions almost 50% of its content externally, also contributing to the growth of the independent production sector. While any investment which strengthens the sector is welcome, Channel 4 believes it is appropriate for the BBC to maintain a strong in-house production presence. To maintain the diversity of high quality content produced by UK PSBs Channel 4 believes it is important that the manner in which content is produced by and for PSBs should vary with a healthy mix of both in house production and externally produced content. The BBC’s in-house production and development centre effectively acts as a training and development hub for the wider industry benefiting the sector as a whole, especially in the case of news production. And as mentioned above it is vital for the production of nations and regions programming.FundingChannel 4 believes that the licence fee remains the most appropriate means of funding the BBC, but licence fee payers are right to demand excellence and value for money from the BBC. UK PSB’s utilise a wide variety of funding models; from publicly or privately owned and commercially funded to the BBC’s model of publicly owned and publicly funded. This diversity in models has been an important feature of the success of the UK’s PSB ecology. It encourages competition between PSBs while also allowing four to exist, offering a range and variety of high quality content and services to suit the tastes of all audiences.   Were the BBC to shift to a commercially funded model it would be likely to negatively impact other commercially funded PSBs, and in doing so harm the investment in content that is central to the success of the PSB ecology in the UK. As previously mentioned in many cases the BBC is best placed to deliver maximum value for money for the licence fee payer but in many cases partnering with other organisations would be beneficial. Channel 4 believes that were the BBC to engage in considered partnership on areas where others have better expertise it could deliver an effective means of maximising the value of the licence fee. Governance:Channel 4 believes that a 10 year Royal Charter remains the most appropriate constitutional framework for the BBC. The certainty that a 10 year charter provides, enables the BBC to take a long term, strategic approach to its investments which is unlikely to be possible with a shorter charter agreement. However in a rapidly changing communications environment it would be appropriate to be able to make targeted changes to the Charter if and when appropriate.The BBC’s current governance and regulation has come under increased scrutiny in recent months and Channel 4 believes it is appropriate to closely examine whether the existing structure and mechanisms are still appropriate. The Trust is currently charged with being both cheerleader and regulator for the BBC and these duel responsibilities often conflict with one another so it is right that this is examined as part of the charter review.Channel 4 does not currently hold a firm view on the most appropriate governance and regulation mechanisms for the BBC but plans to engage fully with the charter review when this process formally begins.&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;