&#xa0;Written evidence from Qaser Lab, University College London (LTD0004)&#xa0;

[[[How can local authorities attract ]]]

[[[greater investment from the private sector for the delivery and maintenance of local transport infrastructure? What scope is there for the use of alternative funding streams?]]]&#xa0;The recent economic crisis has determined a cut by central governments of funds available for transport types of investments. In 2009, local authorities suffered a striking reduction in government grants approximately equal to 55%, in conjunction with a 61% reported decrease in revenue from the fiscal system. But what is particularly interesting in relation to these data is the claim by 37% of UK local authorities of the difficulty in securing loans, and above all, they express alarm at not being able to raise long-term borrowing at cost-effective rates (United Cities and Local Government, 2009).&#xa0;Municipal bonds are a possible financial source for local authorities’ transport investment, which however require financial decentralization from central government. There is increasing interest in different European countries such as France, the UK and Germany, to mention a few, to develop municipal bonds to provide loans at competitive rates to local authorities for infrastructure investment. &#xa0;In the UK on average local authorities in England and Wales borrow £ 5 bn each year for infrastructure investment (LGA, 2012) and most of the long-term borrowing by the Councils comes from the Public Works Loan Board. However, in 2010, the UK Treasury decided to increase the Public Works Loan Board rate from 0.2% to 1% above the government benchmark ‘gilt’ rate, followed by other changes in the budget reviews. &#xa0;This continuous tweaking of the rates, and the government’s ambivalent attitude towards localism and decentralised fiscal regimes, has infused uncertainty in the UK infrastructure investment market. These changes have prompted the Local Government Association (LGA) and the Welsh LGA to examine and build the case for an alternative model based on the Nordic very successful municipal bond experience, this is a new collective agency that can coordinate the local authorities and give technical support dedicated to the issuance of bonds for local authorities particularly in infrastructure investment (McCauley, 2012; Medda, 2013). &#xa0;Another possible of private intervention is through pension funds and infrastructure funds. When we consider UK pension fund resources we can observe that the level of resources available for transport investment is too low compared to international levels (Peston, 2012). One of the most active UK pension funds in infrastructure investment, the London Pensions Fund Authority (LPFA) in July 2010 had assets worth only £4.0 billion, with infrastructure investments comprising only 5% (Croce et al., 2011). These figures prove that the UK pension fund mechanisms are still too fragmented to pool sufficient financial resources for the required investments (Croce et al., 2011).  Nevertheless, interesting initiatives such as the Pension Infrastructure Platform (PIP) have been launched to address the shortfall of resources and to attract substantial capital for infrastructure investments. More such initiatives should be created by local authorities in order to address the fragmented UK pension fund industry. Not too dissimilar is the discussion that we can raise on infrastructure funds.&#xa0;Therefore, in order for local authorities to attract greater investment from the private sector authorities must align their objectives more closely with those of private investors, and also examine the use of alternative funding possibilities. The fact that pension funds and infrastructure funds fail to adjust to the needs of private investors represents a type of market failure which requires government/local authority intervention. Ottesen (2011) succinctly remarks that “the government must establish guiding principles and let the market mechanisms work within these established guidelines.” A reasonable proposal would be for fund managers, investors and local authorities to find common ground through interaction and cooperation and seek to restructure the current investment vehicles.     &#xa0;For instance, local authorities can promote the use of hybrid financial structures as effective tools for stimulating green investment.  Hybrid structures are known as ‘split-finance’ models, as the funding is split between two investors: a bank and a pension fund where the bank can fund a construction project such as a greenfield project and then exit after construction is complete. This arrangement would meet the Basel III requirement for shorter investments, and would ensure higher liquidity. A pension fund can then invest in the project during its operation period and thus avoid construction risks.&#xa0;Apart from attracting private investment participation, local authorities should seek out alternative funding schemes. It is worth mentioning that the United Kingdom does not have Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWF). Sovereign Wealth Funds are public investment funds that are usually funded by foreign-exchange reserves. Introducing a UK Sovereign Wealth Fund could be an alternative form of funding.  It is worth mentioning here that other than being a new form of funding scheme, SWFs can also be used to attract private investment. As observed by Armitstead (2012), the establishment of a British Sovereign Wealth Fund would anchor the advocacy of the UK Government in infrastructure investment, thereby instilling greater confidence in its returns. Research conducted by PWC (2011) shows that the establishment of a Sovereign Wealth Fund improves transparency in a country, thereby mitigating the extensive political risk that exist in infrastructure investments and improving entry conditions for private investors. Comparative data moreover indicates that countries with Sovereign Funds have a higher proportion of infrastructure investment to GDP. &#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;1&#xa0;