&#xa0;AFS16Written evidence submitted by by Neil Moffatt (www.educationreform.co.uk)&#xa0;Education Committee inquiry into the Academy and Free schools &#xa0;The nature in which the Academies and Free School programmes have been operated strongly indicates that educational benefits are too frequently 

[[[not]]] the top priority.&#xa0;A number of schools with excellent track records are forced into Academy status immediately after a single poor Ofsted report, in direct conflict with Ofsted guidance that time should be allowed for the school to find its feet, along with support to do so.&#xa0;A number of schools do swiftly remedy their shortcomings, but the forced conversion process pays no heed to such recoveries, so determined are they that the school is transferred into private hands, a process that is irreversible, expensive, time-consuming and highly disruptive, with sweeping changes in staffing and the adoption of often remotely located school oversight. The education plight of the school is relegated below the academisation process.&#xa0;The party line that 'Academies are the best solution to turn around failing schools' is disingenuous at the very least, and necessarily fails at the very first hurdle when, as happens, Academies themselves fail. The 'solution' then offered, is again a system based approach - to replace the sponsors - rather than to investigate the nature of the failings. There is a fundamental lack of will to do the right thing educationally - to follow the path of improvement that each school in trouble needs - and instead a blind adoption of political ideology. For primary schools, there is simply insufficient data to determine if the systems change that academisation brings is effective. Yet this lack of data is never a hurdle for the DfE in its ideological pursuits. The game they play is with a child's education, conveniently forgetting that what works at secondary school age may not work at primary school age.&#xa0;This myopic nature of the DfE is more clearly illustrated in the faux consultations with schools prior to conversion. In one school, 98% of respondents did not want the Harris Federation to be sponsors. Yet Harris won the contract. A chilling loss of democracy.&#xa0;The claim that Local Authority oversight was failing schools was always a dubious generalisation - as always, some were good and some poor. But they did provide locally based oversight - Academies operated by Academy chains can struggle to match the LA roles because they are remotely located. Additionally, the centralisation of control of Academies and Free Schools into the hands of the DfE is a disaster waiting to happen. They have already tentatively admitted that there needs to be a middle tier of administration to stop the DfE becoming a bottleneck.&#xa0;When operating optimally, schools act as a community hub, and work collaboratively with other schools. By segregating schools by sponsor creates the potential for a divisive rather than collaborative into-school relationship.&#xa0;Whilst not-for-profit (at present), school sponsors are often businesses, and frequently operate with a business mindset, paying executives 5 figure salaries whilst able to recruit unqualified teachers. They can focus on the survival of their business as a priority, which often means the elevation of exam results at all costs. Cheating has been unearthed in some schools. Discipline in others, with longer hours to try to squeeze results from pupils becoming more common. Hallmarks of education via factory methodologies. The manipulation of entrance criteria so as to reduce SEN pupil intake has also been reported - SEN pupils can be seen as a liability as they can drag down the school exam result percentages.&#xa0;When a school operates with a business mindset, education can soon become compromised.&#xa0;At the same time that schools are removed from LA oversight, their finances are becoming ever more opaque, especially in the case of academy chains. The attitude of the DfE is one that falls down on protecting the affairs of the sponsors ahead of transparency. Another indicator that education is not their top priority.&#xa0;Michael Gove and the DfE regularly quote statistics regarding the efficacy of Academies and Free schools that hide the real truth, cherry picking snapshots in order to paint an falsely rosy picture of their Academies and Free schools. Again, they are happy to obfuscate rather than see their programme tarnished in any way.&#xa0;Likewise with recent problems at Kings Science Academy, for example, where staff are now subject to a police investigation into alleged fraudulent activities. The attitude of the DfE when these misdeeds were discovered was to correctly report to the police but to incorrectly fail to ensure that action was taken. They were suitably embarrassed on this very matter by a whistle-blower some 6 months after the matter was raised. &#xa0;The focus again is self-protection rather than on ensuring a safe, secure, effective education system is in place.&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;