&#xa0;Supplementary written evidence from Network Rail (SLC 045)Further to my appearance before the committee on 4 November in connection with the above inquiry I am writing to follow up on a number of issues raised during the oral evidence session.Ufton NervetThe Committee asked about the progress of plans for a bridge at Ufton Nervet to replace the automatic half barrier crossing currently there.As the Committee may be aware, the crossing at Ufton Nervet provides access from the A4 to Ufton Nervet village. This means that the closure of the crossing to facilitate the construction of a bridge on the same alignment as the road is not possible without effectively cutting the village off.The local council and local community have been clear that this approach would not be acceptable and this means that we will need to purchase land in order to build the bridge adjacent to the crossing. At this stage we are actively engaged in dialogue with the landowners regarding purchasing this land and the outcome of these discussions is essential to enable us to establish the location of the proposed bridge.In terms of the bridge construction itself, we have issued an Invitation to Tender with a programme to award a contract in the coming weeks. The appointed designer will then complete a detailed option selection report that we envisage submitting early in Control Period 5 (2014-19). The indicative delivery timescale of the bridge is therefore by the end of 2015. If negotiations over the land purchase proceed smoothly it is possible we may be able to bring this date forward. As I am sure you will understand it is incumbent on Network Rail to demonstrate why the bridge is our strongly preferred option given there is likely to be some potential for objection.Third party contributions towards level crossing closuresDuring the evidence session the Committee also asked for examples of where development in close proximity to level crossings had enabled contributions from third parties towards crossing closures. A number of brief examples are below. As mentioned in the evidence session we often find it very difficult to secure these contributions but are keen for councils to continue helping us do so wherever developments significantly impact upon crossing usage and therefore the level of safety risk. If the Committee would like further details on any of these examples then we would be happy to assist.Hawkes Lane, SuffolkA new stepped footbridge at Hawkes Lane is scheduled for installation by March2014 and is being funded entirely by Suffolk County Council. This is the result of the increased usage of the crossing expected from the local council's new academy which is under construction adjacent to the railway at this location on the grounds and Network Rail's objection to the planning application on the basis of safety concerns.&#xa0;Cottingham, YorkshireA proposed development at Cottingham is estimated to increase risk at the level crossing by 20% because of increased usage. The developer is therefore making a 20% contribution of £200,000 contribution towards a footbridge which will enable the closure of the Bingham, NottingharnshireA supermarket development is contributing £650,000 towards a new footbridge at the station and improvements to a level crossing.Sleaford, LincolnshireA level crossing at Sleaford is being closed with a developer paying the full cost of a new road bridge over the railway. The developer is also contributing £450,000 for a footbridge nearby, with the local council contributing the remainder in recognition of the development's regeneration potential.Finally, the Committee asked about the number of non-compliant level crossings. We carry out a number of relevant level crossing risk management activities during routine maintenance and operations. This includes scheduled risk assessments and scheduled inspections of asset condition that identify defects.               When defects are identified, a work order is issued. As of 26 November 2013 there were 793 level crossings with overdue work orders. I would however like to offer my assurance that identified defects are assessed and managed based on their risk rating with high priority, high risk defects resolved immediately or very quickly within mandated timescales.I hope the above information is of assistance to the committee.Robin GisbyManaging Director, Network OperationsDecember 2013&#xa0;