&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by the Department of Energy and Climate Change (IPC0025)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[How robust are the conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report?]]]The Government considers that the conclusions of the AR5 Physical Science Basis report are robust.  The report was produced by over 850 independent expert scientists, all leaders in their fields (209 Lead Authors, 50 Review Editors and Over 600 Contributing Authors).  The report took over 2 years to produce and underwent multiple rounds of expert review.  It was also reviewed by the 194 governments which form the IPCC.  They have all accepted the findings.   IPCC reports aim to assess the available literature and draw conclusions based on the full range of evidence.  Some individual conclusions will be more robust than others depending on the state of scientific knowledge in a particular area.  The Physical Science Basis report cites more than 9,200 scientific publications and employs defined language to describe the availability of evidence (e.g. limited, medium or robust) and the degree of agreement of the evidence (e.g. low, medium, high).  Similarly defined language is used to describe both the level of confidence in a finding and the likelihood of an outcome or result occurring.  The use of this defined uncertainty language allowed the Physical Science Basis report to communicate clearly and directly the range of certainty in the scientific evidence and confidence in the conclusions drawn. At the opening of the September Physical Science Basis Report acceptance meeting in Stockholm, the IPCC Working Group 1 co-chair Professor Thomas Stocker referred to the unprecedented level of scrutiny and attention to detail that makes the AR5 Physical Science Basis report one of the most robust reports ever written.  “I know of no other document that has undergone this scrutiny and that has involved so many critical people who offered their insight and advice. This is what makes this report so unique. It stands out as a reliable and indispensable source of knowledge about climate change.”Finally it should be noted that there is strong continuity with the conclusions of previous IPCC reports, although the authorship has undergone considerable change since these reports were prepared.

[[[Have the IPCC adequately addressed criticisms of previous reports? ]]]There were only a few inaccuracies in the 4th Assessment Report, and none were found in the previous WGI report.  These had little bearing on the main messages of the 4th Assessment Report. Nevertheless an independent evaluation of IPCC procedures and processes was undertaken by the Inter-Academy Council.  As a result, the IPCC’s processes and management were extensively updated and strengthened.&#xa0;The IPCC has also published a protocol for investigating and if necessary, correcting alleged errors in its reports.  We are confident that criticisms following the last report have been adequately addressed.

[[[How much scope is there to question the report’s conclusions?]]]There are two issues that might be considered here: a) has the IPCC missed key evidence in its assessment of the science of climate change? and b) will its conclusions be over-turned by subsequent research?With regard to (a), as noted previously, the procedures are very robust.  Each and every finding has already been subject to consideration during the report peer-review process.  This enables proper scientific debate and challenge.  Over 1,000 expert reviewers, from 55 countries and 38 governments, examined and commented on the draft report.  Whilst every effort is made to ensure that the literature is fully assessed it is not inconceivable that some issues might be missed. However it seems very unlikely that the main conclusions of the Report would be in error, given the rigour of the processes and the extensive evidence base underpinning them. Furthermore the IPCC is committed to transparency and will be making the draft documents and experts’ comments available publically during 2014, allowing those interested to understand the debates behind some of the conclusions.  With regard to (b) the science of climate change will continue to develop. Science proceeds by challenge and questioning and so new insights, new data and new analysis will undoubtedly arise and may lead to some conclusions being refined. 

[[[&#xa0;]]]The Government understands that the IPCC Working Group I Report assessed all relevant peer-reviewed climate research and modelling undertaken since 2007.  As already noted the report was produced by over 850 independent expert scientists from all over the world, many being leaders in their fields (209 Lead Authors, 50 Review Editors and Over 600 Contributing Authors).  Then the author teams considered the comments of 1000 reviewers. The report reflects any lack of consensus through the use of confidence levels throughout.  Thus, the Government is confident that the assessment takes into account the full range of the wealth of recent research and the conclusions of its authors, plus the full range of views of climate scientists, because of the thorough and open review process. Appendix A to the Principles Governing IPCC Work explicitly states that “in selecting scoping meeting participants, consideration should be given to the following criteria: scientific, technical and socio-economic expertise, including the range of views; geographical representation; a mixture of experts with and without previous experience in IPCC; gender balance; experts with a background from relevant stakeholder and user groups, including governments.”&#xa0;It would be presumptuous to claim that any science is settled. Scientific conclusions depend on evidence and theories may develop as evidence grows as we noted above.  However much of climate science may reasonably be considered, in an every-day sense,  to be settled, where there is a strong observational evidence base or well developed basic physical theory. For example there are very good observations of rising concentrations of greenhouse gases, a warming world, and related effects such as ice loss and sea level rise. The science underpinning the warming effect of greenhouse gases is well understood. However, the complexities of clouds and various feedback mechanisms add uncertainties. And the science is not yet able to resolve many important questions, such as “which local areas will experience more rainfall, and which will experience more droughts?”, or “how will the Indian monsoon be affected by climate change?” Even so, detailed analysis points strongly to the links between increasing greenhouse gas concentrations and warming of the Planet. Predicting the future course of climate change is more uncertain – we cannot easily predict the future course of emissions and there is a degree of uncertainty about both the scale of the warming response to increased greenhouse gases, and about the detailed spatial and seasonal consequences at a local level. But it is clear that continuing on the current track of growing emissions will lead to future increases in temperature, continued melting of ice, and rising sea levels. The scale of change may have some uncertainty but we know enough to recognise that the risks may be considerable and cannot be ignored. Research meanwhile will help reduce this uncertainty by improving our quantification of the many complex interactions within the climate system. &#xa0;The Government considers that the Summary for Policymakers adequately conveys what is meant by scientific uncertainties.  It expresses these uncertainties through likelihood and confidence terminology agreed by the IPCC Reports authors that represents the consensus expert judgements of the authors.  The IPCC’s first (Working Group I) AR5 report is on the physical science basis of climate change and thus concerns science and scientific uncertainties, changes to the climate system and associated climate hazards.  We note that the second AR5 report to be published next March concerns impacts, adaptation and vulnerability will provide a more comprehensive basis for assessing the risks of climate change to the environment and human society.  &#xa0;Sections of the Summary for Policy Makers, Technical Summary and several chapters of the Working Group I report consider climate models and their reliability, by validation against observations and model inter-comparison.  In particular, Chapter 9 is specifically dedicated to climate models’ performance.&#xa0;Understanding and explaining the reasons for the recent slowdown in the rise in global average near-surface temperature is an area of active scientific enquiry by many experts.  The IPCC AR5 Report provides a useful assessment of the available evidence up until the submission deadline in March 2013. It highlighted the volatility of trend estimates on such a short time frame and identified possible reasons for such a short term slow-down in warming compared to the longer term trend, including the El Nino/La Nina natural variation in the Pacific region. An important conclusion from the IPCC was that  global surface temperature is only one measure of climate change, and the heat capacity of the parts of the system that make up the “surface” is dwarfed by the heat capacity of the oceans.  To understand whether the globe is warming, the heat content of oceans and ice must also be considered.  We note that work that has been subsequently published  provides further insight into these reasons. For example, Kosaka and Xie (2013) provided further evidence of the role the Pacific Ocean plays in regulating global temperatures, while Cowtan and Way (2013) show that poor observational coverage of the rapidly warming Arctic may have resulted in an underestimate of recent warming trends.&#xa0;This Report does not deal directly with economic issues. These will be covered fully in the WG2 and WG3 Reports due in March and April 2014. 

[[[&#xa0;]]]The conclusions confirm the need for urgent global action to address climate change. The climate is clearly changing now due to human activities.  The report notes that if little is done to curb current emission trends, global temperatures will exceed the internationally agreed limit of 2oC in a few decades and could reach 5oC above 19th century levels by 2100. It also shows that significant and sustained emission reductions will be required to keep temperatures below 2oC, and delay will require more rapid reductions later. In particular the Report concludes that to have a good chance (&gt;66%) of limiting global temperature rise to 2°C or less, cumulative CO2 emissions need to be limited to 800 gigatonnes of carbon above the pre-industrial period, taking into account the effect of the non-CO2 greenhouse gases . However we have already emitted about 530 gigatonnes of carbon since the industrial revolution and emissions are growing. At current rates we could reach an accumulated emission of 800 gigatonnes of carbon in a few decades.  To avoid exceeding any target on global temperature, global net emissions rates must be reduced to zero.   Therefore current targets on global temperature rise will likely require the development and eventual deployment of technologies which remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. This strengthens the case for countries to agree to undertake urgent action to reduce their domestic carbon emissions and to secure an ambitious legally binding global agreement in 2015. &#xa0;Formally the role of the IPCC is to “assess on a comprehensive, objective, open and transparent basis the scientific, technical and socio-economic information relevant to understanding the scientific basis of risk of human-induced climate change, its potential impacts and options for adaptation and mitigation. IPCC reports should be neutral with respect to policy, although they may need to deal objectively with scientific, technical and socio-economic factors relevant to the application of particular policies.” The IPCC is a highly effective mechanism for assessing scientific knowledge. It is independent, transparent and attracts top scientists who give of their own time to participate. It has well laid out procedures and is open to both expert and Government Review. We see no evidence that it has deliberately sought to justify political commitment or indeed to propose a policy response. &#xa0;The AR5 Physical Science Basis Summary for Policy Makers (SPM) was approved by the Session of Working Group 1; IPCC procedures require that such Sessions are open to all governments.  The “Principles Governing IPCC Work” state that “IPCC reports should be neutral with respect to policy” and the Session was conducted with this principle in mind. Indeed, from the Chair, Co-Chair Prof Thomas Stocker stated that scientific integrity should be paramount in the Session’s deliberations.  The approval process might best be described as a dialogue between the Government representatives and the Lead Authors to ensure conclusions were well founded, balanced, relevant and communicated clearly. The last word on the content was always provided by the Lead Authors present. 

[[[&#xa0;]]]The UK has committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 80% on 1990 levels by 2050. This level was set following the advice of the independent Committee on Climate Change (CCC). This represents the CCC’s view of an appropriate UK share of a global emissions reduction pathway that limits central estimates of global temperature increase by 2100 to 2°C over pre-industrial levels, and keeps the likelihood of a 4°C increase very low (e.g. less than 1%).The Committee on Climate Change, having considered the evidence in the Fifth Assessment Report, recently concluded that the climate objective and the global emissions reduction required to achieve it remain an appropriate basis for the UK’s policy, both because of the very significant risks associated with dangerous climate change and the costs of delayed-action pathways.

[[[&#xa0;]]]Government has committed to review progress towards the EU emissions goal in early 2014. If at that point our domestic commitments place us on a different emissions trajectory than the Emissions Trading System trajectory agreed by the EU, we will, as appropriate, revise our budget to align it with the actual EU trajectory.In accordance with the requirements of the Climate Change Act 2008, the review will take into account advice from the Committee on Climate Change, who have considered the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report in their report published on 7 November 2013.&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;