&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from Registration Council for Clinical Physiologists (HCP0005)]]]&#xa0;

[[[1 Overview]]]&#xa0;This is a submission by the Registration Council for Clinical Physiologists, the voluntary registration body of Audiologists (including Hearing Therapists), Cardiac Physiologists, Gastro-intestinal Physiologists, Neurophysiologists, Respiratory Physiologists and Sleep Physiologists ahead of the Health Select Committee’s accountability hearing with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) to highlight concerns around the Government’s approach to HCPC.&#xa0;

[[[2 The ]]]

[[[Government’s]]]

[[[ relationship with HCPC]]]&#xa0;2.1 RCCP has worked closely with HCPC in the past, when HCPC recommended the statutory regulation of clinical physiologists, and has had a good relationship with HCPC. We believe HCPC does a difficult job well and provides a clear oversight of the professions it regulates. Its transparency reports on the complaints provide the public with the reassurance that HCPC dispenses its tasks thoroughly.&#xa0;2.2 RCCP is concerned that while HCPC is a respected body among healthcare professionals, it risks being undermined by the Government not following its advice in certain areas. For example, over the years, HCPC has recommended that statutory regulation should be extended to include further groups, such as psychotherapists, clinical perfusionists, medical illustrators and clinical physiologists. Initially, the Government appeared to adopt HCPC’s advice, primarily in the 2007 White Paper ‘Trust, Assurance and Safety – the Regulation of Health Professionals in the 21st Century’. However, since then the Government has moved away from introducing statutory regulation towards a model of accredited voluntary registration and has ignored HCPC’s clear evidence for the need for statutory regulation for patient safety. This undermines the standing of HCPC as the regulator for Allied Health Professionals.&#xa0;2.3 The large number of unregulated or voluntary regulated healthcare professions in the NHS also risks undermining public confidence in the regulators. Patients generally assume that the professionals they see in a hospital setting as an integral part of the patient care pathway are regulated like doctors and nurses are. Awareness of the third main regulator, HCPC, is more limited among the general public and the awareness of voluntary regulators is limited even further. This is evidenced by the fact that since its creation in 2001, RCCP has never received a complaint from a member of the public and the number of complaints against clinical physiologists received by RCCP (ten that have reached the investigatory stage since 2001) is significantly lower than might be expected on the basis of the complaints HCPC gets on average. For example, the Health &amp; Care Professions Council received 21 fitness to practice concerns per 5,000 registrants in 2011-12, nearly a quarter of which were raised by members of the public. 30% of all concerns were assessed as concerns where there was a “case to answer”. While the standard among healthcare professionals such as clinical physiologists is generally very high, the statistics suggest that concerns around unregulated practitioners are going unaddressed at the moment.&#xa0;2.4 The Government has proposed Accredited Voluntary Registration (AVR) as an alternative for statutory regulation. From RCCP’s experience, it is not an alternative that is fit for patient safeguarding. As a voluntary register, the powers of the RCCP are severely curbed – from being unable to compel employers who contact RCCP with concerns about a registrant to give evidence to the point where the register’s administrators have themselves faced civil legal action for ‘defaming’ incompetent practitioners that they have attempted to bring sanctions against. &#xa0;2.5 In practice this means that while RCCP operates a disciplinary code and procedure, it cannot protect patients from continuing to be treated by practitioners who have not been registered and who are potentially unfit to practice, as it currently has no powers of enforcement. Since 2001 the RCCP have received ten complaints that have moved to the investigatory hearing stage. In all ten cases the respondents have failed to respond and subsequently have failed to renew their membership thus removing themselves from the process. These practitioners then have the opportunity to start again in a new NHS trust or private facility, helped by a lack of awareness among NHS organisations of the voluntarily registers and the legal grey area of making membership of a voluntary registry a mandatory requirement for employment.&#xa0;2.5 The accreditation element of AVR will not address these problems. Accreditation is given by the Professional Standards Authority, based on a voluntary register’s governance arrangements. They will not assess the effectiveness of the voluntary register in safeguarding patients, i.e. whether a voluntary register can successfully discipline and if necessary prevent a practitioner from working. This means AVR remains inadequate to address the concerns of patients.&#xa0;2.6 Ministers have previously stated that those professions for which a patient safety case can be made will be considered for statutory regulation, subject to a cost-benefit risk analysis.  However, it is unclear if such a risk analysis has already been undertaken, how one is triggered, who would undertake such an analysis and what the minimum scope of such an analysis should be. Given that HCPC has already recommended statutory regulation based on such a risk analysis, it is unclear whether the Government is willing to listen to the bodies it has designated to help ensure patient safety in the NHS.&#xa0;2.7 RCCP would suggest the Committee explore with representatives from HCPC the extent to which the Government acts on HCPC’s advice in regulatory matters and HCPC’s view of AVR.&#xa0;

[[[3 About the Registration Council for Clinical Physiologists]]]&#xa0;3.1 The Registration Council for Clinical Physiologists was founded in 2001 to operate a voluntary register for clinical physiologists, with the understanding that voluntary registration would be for a time-limited period until statutory regulation was in place as recommended by the Health Professions Council in 2004. RCCP’s officers voluntarily maintain the register in addition to their professional duties.&#xa0;3.2 Clinical physiologists work directly with patients, performing sensitive procedures such as assessments and adjustments of pacemakers, lung function tests, and both assessing and diagnosing and treating hearing loss. These can be invasive procedures, including internal ultrasound and endoscopies. Doctors and surgeons then act on the basis of the diagnosis by clinical physiologist, which can include surgeries such as neurosurgery in the treatment of epilepsy. All of these procedures pose serious risks to patients if not carried out with the highest professional standards.&#xa0;3.3 Despite the sensitive and risky nature of the procedures they undertake, clinical physiologists are not subject to statutory regulation in the same way as doctors or nurses – or even professionals such as art therapists. Indeed, even though professionals responsible for dispensing hearing aids on the high street are statutorily regulated, clinical physiologists working in NHS audiology services, prescribing and fitting devices to both patients of all ages, are not. &#xa0;3.4 Many of the procedures performed by clinical physiologists in the UK are performed by statutorily regulated professionals in much of Western Europe, such as doctors, and by clinicians in the United States. As a result of a specifically trained workforce, treatment and diagnosis can be provided more cost effectively by clinical physiologists in the UK, while at the same time freeing up doctors to deal with other patients. This is already happening in some areas but further developments could only take place if concerns around patient safety can be addressed through a robust system of regulation.&#xa0;3.5 Clinical physiology is an increasingly specialised and advanced profession with a large number of dedicated professionals working primarily in an NHS hospital setting. In the UK, there are more than 5,000 clinical physiologists, they form part of the wider Healthcare Science workforce that includes other statutory professions such as Biomedical Scientists. Together, they carry out around 80% of diagnostic procedures in healthcare.&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;