&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by The Grantham Institute for Climate Change (IPC0032)]]]The following response has been prepared by Professor Sir Brian Hoskins, CBE FRS, Dr Simon Buckle CMG FIinstP and Dr Flora MacTavish, all from the Grantham Institute at Imperial College London.The IPCC assessed several thousand peer reviewed scientific papers, comprising a high proportion of the relevant literature. The work was carried out by more than 200 highly qualified authors. The IPCC review process was open and any qualified person had the opportunity to comment on the report. The IPCC took all comments into account, documenting how each comment was handled. The conclusions of the report build on those of previous assessments, and the level of certainty has increased in the fundamentals. We know that greenhouse gas levels are rising, overwhelmingly due to anthropogenic emissions. As a result the climate system is warming due to enhanced radiative forcing, a process that is well understood. The ocean is acidifying due to carbon dioxide (CO2) uptake, another process that is well understood. As a direct result of warmer temperatures, sea levels are rising due to thermal expansion of water and ice loss. These processes will continue as greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise. As well as the direct effects mentioned above, there are more complex feedback mechanisms in the climate system. Feedbacks can be positive (i.e. enhance warming) or negative (reduce warming). There is robust evidence that positive feedbacks dominate, meaning that future warming can be expected to be greater than that given by greenhouse gases alone. As greenhouse gas levels continue to rise, we will see warmer temperatures and more sea level rise. There is less robustness in the details of regional climate change and shorter term changes, i.e. on decadal time-scales.The consensus nature of IPCC means that the report tends to be conservative. For example, its sea level projections are based on the lower numbers given by bottom-up calculations and while larger values cannot be excluded, the IPCC explicitly says that current scientific understanding is insufficient for evaluating their probability. Also as the model results available do not yet include estimates of the uncertain greenhouse gas emissions from melting permafrost, the projections of future warming do not include this enhancement of warming.In addition to the above, we understand that in responding to government requests during a very short period of discussion, some minor errors were made in the SPM, published on 27 September 2013.  These have now been corrected.  An explanation and our assessment of the significance of these changes can be found at http://wwwf.imperial.ac.uk/blog/climate-at-imperial/2013/11/13/updates-to-the-ipcc-wg1-summary-for-policy-makers/ . The InterAcademy Council (IAC) undertook a review of the processes and procedures of the IPCC. It found in its 2010 report  that the IPCC process had been successful overall but that the IPCC needed to continue to adapt. It made a series of recommendations which, if adopted in their entirety, would fundamentally reform IPCC’s management structure while enhancing its ability to conduct an authoritative assessment.  The IPCC finalised its decisions in response to the IAC review in May 2011 and the IAC issued a statement saying that it was “pleased that so many of our report’s recommendations were adopted” and that it hoped its report “will continue to inform management of the IPCC”. As recommended by the IAC, the AR5 WG1 team have used a qualitative “level of understanding” scale in the SPM and TS as well as quantified measures of uncertainty and statements of fact.   Further improvements could be made by ensuring that confidence ranges are comparable across different Assessment Reports.  The ranges in AR5 did not always allow for simple comparison with the conclusions of AR4 in all cases, e.g. the ranges for the Transient Climate response. Much depends on which conclusions are meant here.  Our understanding of the greenhouse effect is well founded on fundamental physical principles.  The global response of the climate system to this forcing is clear in terms of its direction. The pace and scale of this change in part depends on future greenhouse gas emissions as well as the reaction of, and interactions between, the different parts of the climate system. Climate feedbacks can act to amplify or moderate the effect greenhouse gas forcing.  The assessed likely range of both the Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity and the Transient Climate Response reflects some narrowing down of the uncertainties due to these feedbacks. For example, an ECS greater than 6°C for a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide is now considered very unlikely&#xa0;– a much strong statement than the equivalent in AR4. However, further significant narrowing of these metrics for climate change is likely to be very hard to achieve.  Knowledge about key climate feedback mechanisms, such as the effect of clouds, has improved but remains incomplete. Nevertheless there is no evidence of a mechanism that would significantly reduce the intensity of the projected climate change by 2100.  We have less confidence in projected near-term changes which are likely to remain heavily influenced by internal variability as well as change.  In part, this is because the observation systems needed for monitoring changes in the deep ocean have only become available over the past decade or so. Nor do they yet provide complete coverage throughout the depth and extent of the ocean, which due to its huge thermal inertia is the dominant influence on the pace of climate change.  The AR5 WG1 report has reviewed and assessed a very large number of scientific papers. There was an open review system and all comments were taken into account.  We judge that the report is representative of the range of views among climate scientists, though there are likely to be individual scientists who would reach different judgements on aspects of the report. Arguably, the conclusions of the AR5 WG1 report are conservative in terms of several potential mechanisms that could give rise to more significant changes than current models project. Future release of methane from melting permafrost was not considered, and estimates of sea level rise were perhaps conservative. The models themselves have been developed in the context of the current climate system; they may be inadequate guides to potentially non-linear changes in the climate should we continue to force the system to the extent that seems likely without strong mitigation action.  All this argues for more, rather than less, caution in terms of the potential severity and impacts of future climate change. Our understanding of the greenhouse effect is extremely well founded on fundamental physical principles.  The response of the climate system to this human forcing is also very clear from many observations of different aspects of the climate system.  There is in our view no real question that the climate is changing, and that a significant part of these changes is due to human greenhouse gas emissions.  The clear conclusion is that humans are conducting a dangerous experiment with the Earth’s climate. Of course, it is hard to say that anything is ever completely “settled” in science. However, there is now very firm evidence that greenhouse gas levels are increasing; radiative forcing is increasing; atmospheric, oceanic and surface air temperatures are rising; sea level is rising; and ice sheets and glaciers are losing mass globally. In addition, there is now strong evidence that Greenland and West Antarctic ice sheet reductions are contributing significantly to sea level rise. Recent observations suggest that they are now nearly as important as thermal expansion as a cause of sea level rise. On the other hand, regional climate change and decadal variations depend on science that is still relatively young and in need of significant development.There is a clear need for scaled up efforts to measure and monitor the climate system so that we can improve our understanding still further of the climate system response to human emissions.  Both satellite and in situ measurements are needed, particularly in the ocean. Furthermore the unique information contained in the measured spectra of solar and outgoing infrared radiation could be used to understand which climate components are the cause of the changes observed and thus provide a more stringent test of the climate models used to predict better how our climate will evolve. Further work is needed to improve our understanding of clouds and aerosols. There also needs to be more work to improve our understanding of how the atmospheric circulation and regional weather systems may change as the climate warms.In a scientific context, uncertainty is the correct concept.  In terms of making decisions, either in politics or business, the concept of risk is potentially far more useful.  In informing policy and the public, scientists working in this area should be as objective as they possibly can about the level of risk where there is uncertainty or less than full understanding. Risks to human society and the biosphere are expected to be covered in the IPCC Working Group II Report.The IPCC AR5 WG1 dedicates one whole chapter of its report (Chapter 9) to the evaluation of climate models.  The summary to this chapter gives a fair assessment of the improvements made by climate modellers since the last Assessment report (AR4) as well as the remaining challenges.  For example, the AR5 WG1 TS suggests that some models may be too responsive to the effects of greenhouse gases.  We do not yet fully and quantitatively understand the mechanisms responsible for the recent slowdown in surface warming (see our answer to Q9 for further comment). We agree however, with the key conclusion of the authors of Chapter 9 that, “Climate and Earth System models are based on physical principles, and they reproduce many important aspects of observed climate. Both aspects contribute to our confidence in the models’ suitability for their application in detection and attribution studies (Chapter 10) and for quantitative future predictions and projections.”This does not imply bind acceptance of the results from the current models: continual questioning of the results and improvements in the models is crucial.The reduction in global surface temperature rise since 1998 is the topic for a good scientific discussion in AR5 in terms of the forcing of the climate system and its natural variability.  In the period, the energy imbalance of the atmosphere due to the high level of greenhouse gases has been somewhat reduced due to the solar minimum and some minor volcanic eruptions. The fact that more than 90 percent of the additional net energy entering the climate system is stored in the ocean and only a few percent directly warms the atmosphere is discussed, and the AR5 gives evidence that the sub-surface ocean has continued to warm. Since the cut-off date for the publishing of articles assessed by the IPCC, more evidence has become available for the continued warming of the deeper ocean and the likely storage of the excess heat there, and that this is probably the dominant cause of the reduction in global temperature rise in the past 15 years.The empirical and theoretical evidence for climate change due to human activity is extremely strong, with multiple independent lines of evidence. Given the changes observed in other components of the climate system, notably the continued increase in heat stored in the deeper parts of the ocean, the slowdown in the rate of increase in the average global mean surface temperature in the recent period should not be interpreted as evidence that we do not need to be concerned about the risks of climate change. Weather-related events already impose significant costs on society, despite a high degree of adaptation to the current climate.  Particular modes of climate variability, such as the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO), may be associated with distinct and sometimes damaging patterns of weather.  The seasonal monsoons on which many people depend for their livelihoods can also cause significant damage and loss of life.  The frequency of at least some weather related hazards is likely to change significantly, though the natural variability of climate is likely to remain important in some regions into the second half of the century.  Increasing sea-levels will pose significant risks for low-lying coastal cities, e.g. from increased risks of flooding due to storm surges. Over the six years between AR4 and AR5, the core science has become even firmer. The risk posed by continued greenhouse gas emissions is just as large as at the time of the previous report. The AR5 for the first time makes it clear that there is a specific, limited amount of CO2 that can be emitted if the 2°C limit is not to be exceeded with a given probability. This makes effective action to reduce the level of greenhouse gas emissions – at national and international levels - even more urgent. WG1 is strictly an assessment of the current state of the physical sciences with respect to climate change. Furthermore, it seeks to make sure that the “range of scientific views, as represented in the peer-reviewed literature, is considered and evaluated in the assessment, and that the state of the science is concisely and accurately presented”. It has done a credible job in the chapters and Technical Summary.  The “Summary for Policy Makers” (SPM) has to be agreed by government representatives.  The diversity of government interests amongst the participating nations suggests that it would be extremely difficult to push a political agenda or to include policy-relevant statements that were not fully supported by the evidence.  There might however be pressure to make statements in a form that presents a finding in a particular context. For example, in SPA Section A, the SPM says that “Each of the last three decades has been successively warmer at the Earth’s surface”.  Yet this emphasis on decadal temperature changes is, we believe, ill-advised.  In the context of climate change, relatively short-term indices of the state of the climate system have little relevance.  It is quite conceivable for there to be a future decade in which the Earth’s surface temperature cools even with continued climate change. The UK 2050 greenhouse gas emissions target was based on calculated temperatures increases associated with a range of global greenhouse gas emissions trajectories. They showed that to satisfy the two criteria of a 50:50 chance of staying near 2°C and a negligible chance of reaching 4°C it was necessary to at least halve global emissions from a 1990 level by 2050. The results and projections in the AR5 give strong support for the idea that halving global emissions by 2050 is indeed necessary for satisfaction of the two climate change criteria. The carbon budget perspective in AR5 shows the constraint on the total CO2 emissions in the 21st century if such targets are to be achieved. Emissions reductions early in the century may lessen the necessity for stringent (and perhaps impossible) actions such as negative total emissions later in the century. Consistent with this the UK should aim to perform as much reduction as it can well before 2050. The Fourth Carbon Budget in the UK, which was derived on the basis of a least cost path to the UK 2050 target, is therefore even more important. The global carbon budget view might even suggest that the UK target should even be tightened if this were possible.December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;