&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Jonathan ]]]

[[[Cowie]]]

[[[ (IPC0033)]]]&#xa0;1)               

[[[Summary]]]              There is little that is markedly new in AR5 WGI Summary for Policy Makers (other than the IPCC is at last beginning to consider longer-term business-as-usual scenarios in the main body of the text).  AR5 largely affirms (and in this sense strengthens) AR4's conclusions. AR5 is a staging post in charting the on-going progress of climate change science. There are areas of future concern that do deserve further attention such as the possibility of crossing a climate threshold (critical transition).  There is also a presentational issue of comparing forecasts across the sweep of IPCC Assessments.  Separately, there is a policy-driven research issue that might fall between DECC and DEFRA stools: that of the need for species translocation protocols to manage carbon and biological conservation due to climate change driven biome shift.&#xa0;              

[[[Caveat]]]2)              Only a draft of AR5 WG I has been released.              Other than the Summary for Policymakers, it should be noted that the Inter Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) have only released the draft of its Assessment Report 5 (AR5) Working Group I (WG I) report, The Physical Science Basis, in 'approved' form' and that this is on condition that it is not quoted.  Indeed, other than the Summary for Policymakers, the text released has not been finalised not finalised, and nor is it in the most readable format as the figures have yet to be embedded in the text (they currently appear separately at the end of each chapter's texts).  Given this, and that the text of the WG I is nigh on 1,000 pages, I have not yet given it my full attention.  I have though read the Summary for Policymakers and the Technical Summary as well as skimmed a few of the chapters of personal interest.  (I would be genuinely surprised if anyone outside of the IPCC authorial team will have read all of AR5's WGI report.)  (The WG II and WG III reports have yet to be released even in approved draft form.)  Given that the IPCC asks us not to quote their text outside of the Summary for Policymakers, I will only quote from the Summary for Policymakers.  Having said that I may refer in general to some of the rest of the WG I report.&#xa0;&#xa0;              

[[[Main text of response]]]              

[[[Select Committee question:]]] How robust are the conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report?&#xa0;3)              The conclusions are sound given the IPCC caveats              The conclusions are most sound given the IPCC's caveats.  These caveats are many and previous IPCC assessments have stressed the need to be wary of climate 'surprises'.&#xa0;4)              Some conclusions are verifiable fact, only its future forecasts are debatable in nuance/detail (paragraphs 4 – 22)              The 'Summary for Policymakers' principal conclusions vary between those being sound and based on verifiable observation (and so very difficult to dispute such as the amount of warming experienced since the beginning of the 20th century), and those that can be categorised as broadly good guidance (such as the warming we will most likely experience given a certain, hypothetical future emissions path).  For example the first two conclusions…5)"Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many of the observed changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia. The atmosphere and ocean have warmed, the amounts of snow and ice have diminished, sea level has risen, and the concentrations of greenhouse gases have increased…."&#xa0;              and…6)"Each of the last three decades has been successively warmer at the Earth’s surface than any preceding decade since 1850."&#xa0;7)              …are based on observation and direct measurements and so should be considered as being of being made with very highest of confidence.&#xa0;8)              Importantly their conclusion…&#xa0;"Human influence on the climate system is clear. This is evident from the increasing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere, positive radiative forcing, observed warming, and understanding of the climate system."&#xa0;9)              …essentially reiterates the AR4 and builds on earlier IPCC assessments. (Policymakers would be prudent –  a few remain sceptical – to accept this as not doing so would be akin to saying that black equals white and we all know what could happen to such folk when they next attempt to cross a zebra crossing). &#xa0;10)              The IPCC emphasis this last conclusion and add to this with…&#xa0;"Human influence has been detected in warming of the atmosphere and the ocean, in changes in the global water cycle, in reductions in snow and ice, in global mean sea level rise, and in changes in some climate extremes. This evidence for human influence has grown since AR4. It is extremely likely that human influence has been the dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid-20th century."&#xa0;11)               There is nothing new in the AR5  WG I conclusion other than evidence has grown and anthropogenic influences increased with emissions, as exemplified with the following…&#xa0;"Continued emissions of greenhouse gases will cause further warming and changes in all components of the climate system. Limiting climate change will require substantial and sustained reductions of greenhouse gas emissions."&#xa0;12)              Some technical debate and much possible untrained policy-maker confusion may though arise from the IPCC's conclusions as they move into forecast scenarios…&#xa0;Global surface temperature change for the end of the 21st century is likely to exceed 1.5°C relative to 1850 to 1900 for all RCP scenarios except RCP2.6. It is likely to exceed 2°C for RCP6.0 and RCP8.5, and more likely than not to exceed 2°C for RCP4.5. Warming will continue beyond 2100 under all RCP scenarios except RCP2.6. Warming will continue to exhibit interannual-to-decadal variability and will not be regionally uniform&#xa0;13)              First, there is no reason why our global society might strictly adhere to any particular IPCC Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP).  These have been created for illustrative purposes and as such the forecasts are not definitive but are usefully illustrative and important: the 2°C warming above pre-industrial the IPCC refer to above is the limit that some have considered as safe (though some argue that the safe limit is lower than this).  It does seem that we are on a track similar to 'business-as-usual' (to use IPCC 1990 parlance).  Second, much depends on 'climate sensitivity' to greenhouse gas additions.  However in this regard the IPCC have increased their margin since AR4. AR5 says "Equilibrium climate sensitivity is likely in the range 1.5°C to 4.5°C (high confidence)". This is broader than 2 - 4.5°C in AR4 and it might be that the IPCC is hedging its bets due to the current pause in warming.&#xa0;14)              "Changes in the global water cycle in response to the warming over the 21st century will not be uniform. The contrast in precipitation between wet and dry regions and between wet and dry seasons will increase, although there may be regional exceptions"&#xa0;15)              This conclusion firms up what has previously been expected.  As has…&#xa0;"The global ocean will continue to warm during the 21st century. Heat will penetrate from the surface to the deep ocean and affect ocean circulation."&#xa0;16)              This is being observed in places though we have a far from complete monitoring of deep and abyssal waters.&#xa0;17)              "It is very likely that the Arctic sea ice cover will continue to shrink and thin and that Northern Hemisphere spring snow cover will decrease during the 21st century as global mean surface temperature rises. Global glacier volume will further decrease."&#xa0;18)              This is now clear and nations are positioning themselves for development of the Arctic.&#xa0;19)               "Global mean sea level will continue to rise during the 21st century. Under all RCP scenarios the rate of sea level rise will very likely exceed that observed during 1971–2010 due to increased ocean warming and increased loss of mass from glaciers and ice sheets."&#xa0;20)              This also is clear.  However what we cannot say with much certainty is broadly how much sea level will rise by the end of the century though it will certainly rise. Sea level rise is far more a source of debate among the climate change science community.&#xa0;21)              "Climate change will affect carbon cycle processes in a way that will exacerbate the increase of CO2 in the atmosphere (high confidence). Further uptake of carbon by the ocean will increase ocean acidification."&#xa0;22)              The IPCC say this with 'high confidence' and I concur (I come to the climate science table through the life and environmental sciences).  What is uncertain is the degree of this positive feedback effect which could be more serious than the three lines of this conclusion suggest.&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Select Committee question:]]] To what extent does AR5 reflect the range of views among climate scientists?&#xa0;23)               Views vary largely due to detail and nuance and not the overall IPCC thrust              If you want a proper answer to this question then a survey needs to be commissioned.  I do meet climate change science researchers in committees and at symposia.  My own (personal and unscientific) take with the ecological, Earth system scientists and others involved in climate change research (who may not consider themselves to be 'climatologists' ('climate scientists') as per the subject of the Committee's question) is that there is little that is very new in the AR5 report and nothing that necessitates a marked change to current research programmes.  There is therefore little merit to question the AR5 conclusions and the climate community views beyond those previously asked of the AR4 assessment.  However, my impression is that the IPCC Assessments are consensus views assembled from experts whose own views vary from individual to individual only in nuance and detail, and not with regard to the broad, overall IPCC conclusions. (I have not discerned a small minority whose views markedly differ from the IPCC's overall conclusions but given that I have not personally met many IPCC principal authors it could be I missed them. Having said that, I do read the primary literature widely and meet a number of scientists whose work feeds in to the IPCC process.)&#xa0;&#xa0;              

[[[Select Committee question:]]] How robust are the conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report? Have the IPCC adequately addressed criticisms of previous reports? How much scope is there to question of the report’s conclusions?&#xa0;24)              Most AR4 criticisms relate to WG II and III              I have answered most of this above.  However, with regards to addressing criticisms of AR4 it should be noted that most of AR4's criticisms (such as the Himalaya glacier statement) do not relate to the IPCC WG I which focuses on the science, but WGs II and III.  (Remember, WG I-related concerns over things like the Mann hockey-stick graph were raised prior to AR5 and were mainly addressed in the AR4 2007 assessment's WG I.)  &#xa0;25)              Sea level rise has long been more debatable              Sea level rise has long been more debatable compared to temperature rise and the IPCC is rightly less specific here (indeed some might say overly cautious) but a reading of the academic literature does not (yet) provide a clear picture.&#xa0;&#xa0;              

[[[Select Committee question:]]] How effective is AR5 and the summary for policymakers in conveying what is meant by uncertainty in scientific terms? Would a focus on risk rather than uncertainty be useful?&#xa0;26)              Risk is more the province of WG II and III              Uncertainty has always been difficult to convey outside of science and statisticians.  The IPCC has come up with a system that conveys uncertainty as well as might for policy-makers. A focus on 'risk' would be decidedly out of place in WG I.  'Risk' implies that there is something being risked and hence that there are 'stakes' and 'hazard'.  This takes us into the realm of degree of 'impacts' and 'likelihood thereof', and this is firmly the province of WG II.  There is a difference between 'certainty' (or 'probability'), 'risk' and hazard'.  (I am likely to be able to walk ten feet along a joined twin line of bricks laid on the ground without much problem.  However if this two line of bricks was part of a tall, two-brick wide, wall then though (psychology aside) I may still be able to walk it with the same 'certainty', the 'hazard' if I came off would be much greater.)&#xa0;&#xa0;Select Committee question: Can any of the areas of the science now be considered settled as a result of AR5’s publication, if so which? &#xa0;27)              Areas settled              The IPCC's assessments as a whole (1990-2013) portray a clear picture that:-i)    The Earth is currently warmingii)   The Earth's climate has changed in the pastiii)  Climate change has a major impact on natural systems (on which we depend) iv) Current warming is largely due to human activity and the trajectory is unprecedented in human history leading to more intense extreme weather events&#xa0;Policy-makers should consider these matters settled.  It is therefore worrying that a still few members of either side of both Houses in Westminster do not accept the policy-maker (UN) created scientific consensus (IPCC) view.  If these policy-makers will not accept this view, on what authority are they basing their decisions?&#xa0;28)              Good to see long-term business-as-usual forecasts beginning to be considered              There are a number of new areas of science in the main body of the IPCC text yet to be approved.  I was pleased to see (in the draft of chapter 12) consideration of RCP 8.5 which is effectively continued long-term reliance on fossil fuels (including more expensive fossil fuels such as tar sands) beyond the 21st century, as this is the trajectory we are currently on (we have yet to begin to stabilise greenhouse emissions and these are still increasing) and policy-makers do need to know where we are heading if we fail to act decisively. This long-term projection depicts a median temperature rise of around 8°C by 2150 (and I am not sure if this includes permafrost and methane clathrate positive feedbacks, if not then this warming will be more severe, and if it does include feedbacks this 8°C is more than severe enough to completely disrupt the current pattern of agricultural systems globally).  The IPCC has to date been reluctant to look at such a long-term, business-as-usual type scenario.  This I suspect has been because it has not wanted to be overly alarmist and back in 1990 (its first assessment) it possibly did not consider that a quarter of a century on we would still be on its (1990) business-as-usual trajectory.&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Select Committee question:]]] What areas need further effort to reduce the levels of uncertainty?&#xa0;29)              Weather and climate hence computers and Earth system modelling need continued effort              The exact degree of warming and the nature of weather and weather patterns in a warmer world needs further elucidation.  This requires better modelling, both via understanding of the Earth system and model execution which requires improved computer technology.  The models themselves require increased resolution and improved biological components (including bio-geological components such as soil and marine carbon biosphere reservoirs).  Currently the race to improve computer technology and climate models is more or less neck and neck and is likely to continue with research investment as is.  This is a long-term venture and policy-makers need to realise that with this research we are likely in for the long-haul with incremental progress continually being made over the years.&#xa0;30)              Solar monitoring              Of lesser concern, solar monitoring is also required and here much is already being done or research is in train.  However here it will be a while before we have a sufficiently long record before major solar uncertainties can be reasonably assessed.  Having said that (and I should say that here I am looking outside my own area of interest and over the shoulders of others), it is unlikely that solar influence will hugely affect the broad warming trajectory in the long-term we currently foresee, but it might affect decadal warming adding a ripple to the longer-term warming trend.&#xa0;31)              Earth system science and crossing critical transitions needs more attention              What is important is Earth system (biosphere science) research. Earth system understanding in turn requires continued long-term monitoring and, importantly, improved thermal monitoring of deep seas and abyssal depths.  It also requires better understanding of palaeoclimates.  Here the probability of flipping to a new climate state also needs to be considered should the Earth system go through a 'critical transition' and cross a climate threshold.  With this in mind, AR4 (WG I, 2007, pp442-3, in chapter 8, Palaeoclimate, section 6.3.3) drew attention to the similarities of what we are doing now with what are known as carbon isotope excursion events especially that of the early Eocene 55 million years ago (known as the IETM or PETM). Back then it seems as if vulcanic greenhouse gas warmed the Earth so inducing the release of organic carbon (12-carbon rich) from biosphere reservoirs which enhanced the warming further via a positive feedback loop. This warming event was initiated within a few centuries, and saw temperature rise, sea level rise, ocean acidification and marked biome (ecosystem assemblages) shift polewards, for around 100,000 years.  Furthermore, we know from carbon isotope (13C/12C) analysis broadly the amount of 12-carbon isotope rich greenhouse gas involved, and as AR4 noted this was of a similar order of magnitude to the amount of carbon we will have likely emitted since the industrial revolution and the end of this century unless radical actions are taken to curb greenhouse gas emissions.  It is therefore a shame that the ambition laid out in Agreed Reference Material For The IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (2009) that AR5 would see ' [Palaeoclimate] Abrupt climate changes and their regional expression', as well as 'Palaeoclimate perspective on irreversibility in the climate system', was not realised.  Had it been realised AR5 would have most likely seen a further assessment of the PETM / IETM literature as well as that on critical transitions and climate thresholds.&#xa0;32)              There is a possible policy gap between DECC and DEFRA policy-driven research, an example being managing species shift for both biological conservation and carbon management purposes              A little beyond the scope of this consultation, but nonetheless related, is the question of ecological shift.  Given global warming will be inevitable in the absence of major cuts in emissions as the WG I Summary for Policymakers makes clear,, species' ranges will shift.  Yet with some ecosystems (such as woodland) taking many decades to establish, there is a very strong case for species translocation along climate gradients.  Yet currently there are no formally agreed protocols for such translocation.  Nor are their formal networks of dialogue between nature reserves along climate gradients nationally and internationally to manage species and ecosystem migration, as well as maintaining carbon-related ecosystem function in addition to biological conservation.  I mention this now as there is concern that some research and policy discussion may fall between DECC and DEFRA stools.  As climate-change-driven species translocation is climate change, and carbon, related it could be argued as to fall under DECC's purview. Conversely, as these are to do with environmental conservation it could be seen as the responsibility of DEFRA.  Consequently, I flag this issue now for your attention.&#xa0;33)              Future IPCC forecast portrayals need to be standardised and compared with past B-a-U forecasts              Each IPCC Assessment has a graph of warming projections over the 21st century.  Here the date the projections commence vary from assessment to assessment and there is no sense given as to how these compare with previous Assessment projections. What I would like to see in the next IPCC Assessment WG I report (AR6) is for the warming projections to commence from 1990 as that is a key policy date. I would also like to see additionally a graph of all the IPCC business-as-usual scenarios and their SRES and RCP analogues from the various Assessments (1990-2013 etc) all on the same graph.  I have actually done this for the assessments up to and including AR4 (2007) and they all fall within the upper and lower estimates for the IPCC 1990 business-as-usual scenario: they are (un)surprisingly similar and should lend confidence as to the continuation of message.&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[              ]]]

[[[Select Committee question:]]] Has AR5 sufficiently explained the reasons behind the widely reported hiatus in the global surface temperature record?&#xa0;34)              Pause not yet satisfactorily explained              I have not (yet) come across a detailed examination of this question in AR5 (but this may be because I have not read the whole draft WG I volume thoroughly).  Speaking personally, it should be said that we cannot say exactly why the global surface record has ceased to show an overall warming trend the past one-and-a-half decades since near the end of the 20th century.  Having said that, this 'pause' is not that particularly unexpected and there are a number of possible explanations for it.  It is 'not unexpected' because we have had pauses before. The period from 1940 – 1980 was a previous pause.  Yet, because there is now more anthropogenic greenhouse gas in the atmosphere today compared to back then, and because atmospheric greenhouse concentrations are continuing to rise, we might expect this current pause to be shorter.&#xa0;35)              The long pause was predicted              Furthermore, this pause is not only 'not unusual' it was actually predicted by at least one team half a decade ago that the then short warming pause would continue (Yu Kosaka &amp; Shang-Ping Xie, 2008, Nature 

[[[501,]]] 403-7). They predicted that the N. Atlantic would cool as would the Pacific. (Their reasons hypothesised were weather/climate cycle and Broecker global thermohaline circulation related.) They said that such cooling may be so great as to impede the current warming trend.  They.. "conclude that the recent cooling of the tropical Pacific and hence the current hiatus are probably due to natural internal variability rather than a forced response. If so, the hiatus is temporary, and global warming will return when the tropical Pacific swings back to a warm state. Similar hiatus events may occur in the future..."  &#xa0;36)              The question of importance is where has the heat gone?              More recently other work points to the El Niño cycle (again the Pacific related) as the cause of the pause.  There are other explanations that may or may not have a significant bearing on the problem and these include our lack of a spatially detailed long-term Arctic record.  Irrespectively, the hiatus in the global surface temperature record does not undermine the IPCC consensus view.  Here the real issue of concern is what has happened to the 'missing' heat?  The obvious suggestion is that this has gone into the oceans and this is worrying as that will eventually lead to marine methane clathrate destabilization with the release of methane and additional warming above and beyond that incurred by direct human emissions.&#xa0;&#xa0;              Select Committee question: Do the AR5 Physical Science Basis report’s conclusions strengthen or weaken the economic case for action to prevent dangerous climate change?&#xa0;37)              They affirm the case              They affirm the case already made.  AR5 I contains nothing I can see, from my reading of the rest of the WG I report so far, that in any way undermines the case previously made by earlier IPCC Assessments.&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Select Committee question:]]] What implications do the IPCC’s conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report have for policy making both nationally and internationally? &#xa0;38)              AR5 affirms previous assessments' policy relevance              The implications are that since AR4 (2007) new science affirms previous understanding, that current unaltered emission trends remain on an unfavourable trajectory, and that we may well exceed the 2°C so-called 'safe' warming limit.&#xa0;39)              Irrespective of climate change, medium-to-log-term finite fossil fuel economics necessitate weaning off of fossil carbon.              At this point I would like to take leave of the IPCC and draw the Committee's attention to the implications of the world continuing its addiction to fossil carbon.  Irrespective of climate change concerns, fossil fuel consumption is increasing.  Yet we all know too well that fossil fuels are finite.  The cheap fossil fuel reserves go first leaving more expensive reserves for later use.  This drives up prices.  World population is also growing and so demand for fossil fuel rises. This too drives up prices.  These different increased pressures on price act synergistically. The long-term, real-term cost of fossil fuel is inevitably set to increase.  It is therefore in nations' interests to switch to non-fossil fuel energy irrespective of climate change arguments. (This case was at the heart of Climate and Human Change: Disaster or Opportunity?, 1998, back when climate change denial was stronger than it is today.)  Only short-termism gives any grounds for not cold-Turkeying from fossil fuel.  Delaying matters by kicking the issue into the long grass simply makes things worse for future generations.  Add back in IPCC climate concerns and it really is inexcusable (arguably a wanton dereliction of duty) in terms of both national and global interest for policy-makers to avoid acting.  (See also the Stern report on the economics of climate change.)&#xa0;&#xa0;40)              

[[[Select Committee question: ]]]Is the IPCC process an effective mechanism for assessing scientific knowledge? Or has it focussed on providing a justification for political commitment?&#xa0;41)              There is more than a little post hoc ergo propter hoc about this question.  Let us be clear, policy-makers (those concerned with political commitment) through the United Nations (UN) called for  i. an assessment of climate change science, and  ii. formulation of realistic response strategies.  The UN in turn called upon two of its agencies (the UN Environment Programme and World Meteorological Organization) to establish the IPCC and this they did in 1988.  That the IPCC has provided a sufficiently clear picture, that demonstrates that political commitment is warranted, is neither a failing of the IPCC nor an indication that there is some sort of bias.  Climate change has been an issue on the formal agenda of the World's political leaders at least since 1972 and the UN Conference on the Human Environment that year.  Since then climate change has formally been on the political agenda at the UN level as well as to varying degrees on the national-level agenda of a number of UN member states.  The IPCC itself does not define what political action should be taken: it simply provides information.  That climate change is an issue of political concern precedes the IPCC and was the reason for its formation.&#xa0;42)              Try replacing 'the IPCC process' and 'it' in the question with 'evidence gathering' and it is clear that the question is one of post hoc ergo propter hoc.&#xa0;43)              Is 'evidence gathering' an effective mechanism for assessing scientific knowledge? Or has 'evidence gathering' focussed on providing a justification for political commitment?&#xa0;44)              The alternative is that policy should not be evidence-based.&#xa0;&#xa0;45)              

[[[Select Committee question: ]]]Is the rate at which the UK Government intends to cut CO2 emissions appropriate in light of the findings of the IPCC AR5 Physical Science Basis report?&#xa0;46)              Cuts policy about right              Given global emissions, the rate of cuts needs to be increased so as to attempt to avoid serious warming.  However both pragmatically, and in actuality (as the UK is only responsible for a small proportion of global emissions), this is not possible.  Current UK policies are therefore probably about right.&#xa0;47)              Background and conflict of interest statement              I am pleased to respond as an independent scientist who has over the years reviewed the academic literature for university-level texts of climate change as well as engaged/organised a number of climate and energy-related ventures for learned societies.  I have never received research grants or in the past three decades been employed by a research institute or energy sector employer.  My most recent climate-change-related work of substance was Climate Change: Biological and Human Aspects (2013) from Cambridge U. Press.  My views are therefore not prejudiced by monetary concerns from industry or academia, other than indirectly in the form of book royalties should any from those sectors purchase my texts.  A summary of some of my activities can be found on http://www

[[[.]]]science-com

[[[.]]]concatenation

[[[.]]]org&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;