&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted ]]]

[[[by]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[the University of Reading]]]

[[[ (IPC0035)]]]1.              The Department of Meteorology at the University of Reading is one of the world’s leading centres for research into meteorology and the climate system, and the University’s Walker Institute links climate scientists with other researchers and the wider stakeholder community. Academics in the Department have been involved in all IPCC Working Group I assessments, as Coordinating Lead Authors, Lead Authors and Review Editors. This submission was prepared by a group of scientists from the Department.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY2.              In our view, the conclusions of the IPCC 5th Assessment Report Working Group 1 (Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis, hereafter referred to as AR5 WG1) are robust and consistent with the scientific evidence. The IPCC process is robust by design and represents the views and research findings presented in the peer-reviewed scientific literature. Being consensual, there is a tendency for conclusions to be more conservative than those which would be reached in a more conventional small-group peer review exercise. The IPCC process has itself generated new scientific advances, primarily through stimulating the research community to undertake and learn from model intercomparison exercises.3.              The AR5 WG1 report affirms in stronger language than in AR4 the past and future effects of increasing greenhouse gas emissions, providing additional information for policymakers in considering the nature and extent of climate change mitigation and adaptation policies.4.              The evidence reviewed in the AR5 WG1 report reaffirms the evidence available at the time of the setting of the UK’s Fourth Carbon Budget.  5.              The AR5 WG1 report considered the apparent “hiatus” in the rise in global average surface temperature, and its conclusions are consistent with the scientific evidence and data available at the time. However, this is a rapidly developing area of inquiry.&#xa0;&#xa0;SUBMISSIONHow robust are the conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report? Have the IPCC adequately addressed criticisms of previous reports? How much scope is there to question the report’s conclusions? 6.              It is our view that the AR5 WG1 report represents a robust evaluation of the available scientific literature. A key part of the IPCC assessment is to distinguish higher confidence conclusions from the more unresolved aspects of our scientific understanding of the climate system and climate change in which confidence is lower. The distinction is made within the IPCC report by its use of terminology that reflects quantitative levels of likelihood and scientific confidence. On the whole, we believe that the adopted terminology adequately reflects the level of scientific consensus that prevailed at the time the report was written. The fact that a large component of recent climate change is a consequence of human-driven changes in atmospheric composition is an example of a robust conclusion. In contrast, gaps in scientific knowledge limit our confidence in predictions of future regional precipitation changes. &#xa0;7.              Some criticisms of previous Working Group I reports focused on the review process, and the important role of review editors in overseeing the review process has been re-affirmed in AR5. Government review comments have again played a strong part in improving upon the second-order draft.  &#xa0;8.              The conclusions that the report describes as “(very) high confidence” are unlikely to change significantly in future reports. Those areas of climate science that are characterised in the report as having lower confidence  are challenged on a regular basis, and the challenges that stand the test of time are integrated in the following report, reflecting the normal scientific process. Indeed, studies challenging some of the AR5 WG1 conclusions are already appearing in the scientific literature, often in high impact journals. We are unaware of any barrier that prevents scientists wishing to question the IPCC assessment in the peer-reviewed scientific literature.To what extent does AR5 reflect the range of views among climate scientists?9.              The IPCC review process seems a robust mechanism for ensuring that the range of well-found views (one requirement of which is publication in the scientific literature) is adequately represented. If the IPCC chapter teams should have neglected relevant studies, then the two phases of open review process, the responses to which are overseen by Review Editors, should ensure that significant and relevant studies were represented in subsequent revisions. This is of course reliant on a widespread involvement in the review process by the community as a whole, but the statistics presented by IPCC indicate a good level of involvement. Can any of the areas of the science now be considered settled as a result of AR5’s publication, if so which?&#xa0; What areas need further effort to reduce the levels of uncertainty?10.              Many of the basics of climate science (such as the fact that increased levels of greenhouse gases will lead to a warming of the climate system) had been established in earlier assessments and so are considered largely settled. There is sufficient confidence in many of the observed changes in the climate since 1950 for these to be presented as facts. Like many scientific areas, progress in climate science is steady and incremental, so it is difficult to identify new areas which have become completely settled in AR5 WG1, although many areas were identified in which confidence in our understanding had increased, for example the attribution of the warming since 1950 to anthropogenic causes. It is important to stress that IPCC assessments do not do research, but rather report research that is already available in the scientific literature. There is a multitude of areas where further research, by the community as a whole, is required to reduce uncertainty. These include the continued need to monitor the climate system, the role of cloud feedbacks in determining the magnitude of climate change, the role of aerosol particles in modifying cloud properties, and the need to improve confidence in more regional-scale climate predictions. This list is by no means exhaustive.How effective is AR5 and the summary for policymakers in conveying what is meant by uncertainty in scientific terms? Would a focus on risk rather than uncertainty be useful?11. AR5 WG1, including its Summary for Policymakers (SPM), uses clearly and carefully defined language to express uncertainty through a combination of scientific confidence and likelihood. Scientific confidence is expressed as being low to very high, depending upon the amount of available evidence and the level of agreement between multiple lines of evidence. Where likelihoods have been estimated these are expressed using terms such as ‘very uncertain’, ‘likely’ and ‘virtually certain’ which correspond to specific probability ranges. We believe this combination of qualitative and quantitative measures is an effective means of conveying the uncertainty in the scientific conclusions of the AR5 WG1, given the diverse nature of the scientific evidence being assessed.&#xa0;12. If risk is interpreted to mean the likelihood of an outcome which is considered to be of high consequence, then any of the likelihood statements of the AR5 WG1 that refer to thresholds can be straightforwardly translated into statements of risk. For example, the AR5 WG1 SPM statement that cumulative carbon emissions need to be kept below 1000 PgC in order for global warming relative to pre-industrial times to likely not exceed 2C, implies that there is a 33% risk of global warming exceeding 2C under these conditions. Since the likelihood statements in the AR5 WG1 are all based on probabilistic calculations, it should in principle be straightforward to obtain risks of exceeding particular thresholds from those calculations. However, the AR5 only estimated likelihoods for statements where the scientific confidence is fairly high. This reflects the conservative nature of the assessment, since it would not have been possible to obtain a consensus on likelihoods of outcomes where the scientific confidence is fairly low. For example, the likelihood of increases in intense tropical cyclone activity, or increases in intensity and/or duration of drought, was not assessed in the near-term; for the long-term (end of the 21st century) the likelihood of such increases was only assessed in certain regions of the world, and without quantifying the extent of the likely increases. Yet policy-makers are presumably interested in such risks, because the consequences would be significant. Assessment of risk in areas where scientific confidence is low would therefore be useful, but would probably have to come from a mechanism other than the IPCC.&#xa0;Does the AR5 address the reliability of climate models?13. Yes: there is an entire chapter dedicated to the topic. Has AR5 sufficiently explained the reasons behind the widely reported hiatus in the global surface temperature record?14.              The widely reported hiatus in the rise in global mean surface temperature was a rapidly developing research topic while the AR5 WG1 was being written. While there were certainly many papers to assess, the topic was nowhere near as mature as most of the other topics covered in the report. Furthermore the observations of ocean heat content and radiative forcing were not adequate to obtain a complete picture, given the short time scale of the phenomenon from a climate perspective. On the topic of the hiatus the AR5 WG1 was essentially forced to serve as a climate bulletin, dealing with a breaking event, which is not what it was designed to do. Under these circumstances the AR5 authors adequately assessed the scientific evidence available at the time, recognizing that the picture would almost certainly evolve in the future. Is the IPCC process an effective mechanism for assessing scientific knowledge? Or has it focussed on providing a justification for political commitment?15.              The IPCC scientific assessments are a large-scale undertaking. Author teams, and especially the co-ordinating lead authors, are committed to prolonged and deep involvement (via successive lead author meetings, through various cycles of producing draft chapters and via the need to respond to the many review comments). Thus it requires these scientists, and their employing institutes, to take on this significant workload. &#xa0;16.              The resulting assessment chapters are certainly comprehensive in their coverage of their area, describe in detail how the area has evolved since the previous assessment, and discuss where the most important uncertainties remain. The chapters remain an important resource for the scientific community for many years after they are produced.  In that sense, they certainly are highly effective, recognizing the effort required to produce them is immense. &#xa0;17.              We note that the IPCC assessments do differ from critical reviews of the scientific literature as would be produced by (normally) small author teams and mediated by the standard peer review procedure used by learned journals. In that case, authors have much more freedom to define the scope of their reviews and are able to be more radical and forthright in their assessment and critique of the literature. By contrast, in order to carry entire chapter teams together, and to satisfy the many review comments, IPCC assessments are normally more consensual and conservative in their nature. &#xa0;18.              As part of the preparations for the recent assessments, the community has also voluntarily undertaken large-scale intercomparisons of both observational datasets and outputs from climate models, generated by many institutes across the world. These intercomparisons have generated much new information, pointed to areas where understanding is robust. They have also provided a stimulus and motivation for understanding the differences that emerge from these intercomparisons, a process that lasts for many years following the assessment.  Without the impetus of the IPCC assessments it is unlikely that these intercomparisons would be so comprehensive. An example of the value of the intercomparisons is that projections of the patterns of future temperature change are quite robust amongst climate models but, by contrast, the projections of patterns of precipitation change are not. The intercomparison process places a significant burden on the science community. For the next assessment, it will be important to assess whether the scope of future intercomparisons could be scaled back to make them more manageable, so that resource is not distracted away from other activities in the individual institutes. &#xa0;19.              The assessments present policy-relevant advice, and the policymakers provide input on the overall structure of the reports and review drafts. However they do not dictate the nature of any policy-relevant advice that emerges from the process, which is based, as it should be, on the prevailing scientific view at the time of the assessment. To what extent did political intervention influence the final conclusions of the AR5 Physical Science Basis summary? 20.              Policymakers were able to input review comments to the second-order draft and in the final plenary sessions in Stockholm in September 2013. We believe that on the whole, this input was a positive one that led to greater clarity of presentation in the conclusions, and the wide spectrum of political viewpoints would have prevented any overtly political influence from one sector. We are not aware of any evidence that political intervention influenced the final conclusions. Do the AR5 Physical Science Basis report’s conclusions strengthen or weaken the economic case for action to prevent dangerous climate change? What implications do the IPCC’s conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report have for policy making both nationally and internationally? 21.              The IPCC AR5 Working Group I report concludes that there is more convincing evidence that humans are influencing the climate than was available at the time of the AR4 in 2007. This is based not only on longer series of observations, but also on a larger body of refereed literature. The report also concludes that continued emissions will cause further warming and that any efforts to limit climate change will require substantial and sustained reductions of greenhouse gas emissions. These conclusions are also phrased in stronger language than in AR4. Correcting for the different baseline period, the AR5 mean estimate of change in temperature at the end of the 21st century under the highest forcing (RCP8.5) is very similar to the highest change presented in AR4. The mean estimate of the temperature change using the lowest forcing in AR5 (using RCP2.6) is lower than the lowest mean change in AR4, but this is because the lowest emissions pathways considered explicitly assume very stringent controls on emissions – unlike the lowest scenario used in AR4.Is the rate at which the UK Government intends to cut CO2 emissions appropriate in light of the findings of the IPCC AR5 Physical Science Basis report? What relevance do the IPCC’s conclusions have in respect of the review of the fourth Carbon Budget? 22.              The IPCC AR5 WG1 report has progressed by including results from advanced carbon cycle models that simulate the budgets of carbon in the atmosphere, land vegetation and soil, and the ocean. The only scenario presented in which it is likely that global average surface temperature rises will remain below 2 degrees was the most stringent (RCP2.6). The carbon cycle models confirm that very large decreases in global carbon emissions, declining to around or below zero by the end of the century, are needed for this scenario. The corresponding maximum total carbon emission to achieve this goal is 1000 GtC of which 445 to 585 GtC have already been emitted. Thus the latest science from the IPCC reconfirms the scientific evidence that was available at the time the 4th carbon budget was set.December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0; www.met.reading.ac.uk www.walker-institute.ac.uk Professor Nigel Arnell (Director, Walker Institute), Dr Nicolas Bellouin, Professor Bill Collins, Professor Ted Shepherd (Grantham Professor of Climate Science), Dr Len Shaffrey, and Professor Keith Shine (Regius Professor of Meteorology and Climate Science). 