&#xa0;&#xa0;1. I am a climate researcher and Professor of Geosystem Science in the University of Oxford’s School of Geography and the Environment and Department of Physics. I have served as a lead author on detection of climate change and attribution of causes in the Third and Fifth Assessments (2001 &amp; 2013) and as Review Editor on Global Climate Projections for the Fourth Assessment (2007). I have recently criticized the IPCC practice of producing exhaustive Assessments on a 6-year cycle because I did not feel it best served the interests of the governments whom IPCC is intended to inform, and represented an excessive burden on the scientific community. Contrary to some reports, I did not call for the IPCC itself to be closed down. &#xa0;How robust are the conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report? Have the IPCC adequately addressed criticisms of previous reports? How much scope is there to question of the report’s conclusions?&#xa0;2. Core factual conclusions of the AR5 are broadly in line with national and independent scientific assessments of the climate issue and consistent with current evidence and understanding. No scientific document is infallible, and the process of multiple authorship and review does not guarantee infallibility. In addressing criticisms of previous reports, the focus has been on making the review process more bureaucratic and further tightening the criteria for inclusion and exclusion of material. &#xa0;3. In my view, the suggestion that a formal process can itself guarantee the absolute accuracy of any document and put its conclusions beyond question is a misrepresentation of the way science works. It is often suggested that, because they have been restricted to peer-reviewed sources and passed through multiple stages of review, the IPCC’s conclusions are beyond reasonable doubt. This is misleading, because it focuses attention on the process, rather than the evidence itself (indeed, the thrust of the committee’s questions does raise concerns that the committee has allowed itself to be misled in this regard).&#xa0;4. Having been involved in three IPCC assessment cycles, I do not see that the measures taken since the 2007 report have significantly altered the robustness of core conclusions, because these were already as robust as any scientific assessment process could make them. The committee should be aware that the importance of errors in previous assessments has been wildly exaggerated. &#xa0;5. No one has ever argued that errors deep in the Impacts section of the 2007 Assessment had any influence whatever on that report’s core scientific conclusions. I can attest that the authors of the Global Climate Projections chapter of Working Group 1 were completely unaware of the suggestion that Himalayan glaciers would disappear by 2035 when we were formulating our conclusions – indeed it was a Working Group 1 author who first drew attention to this error.&#xa0;6. Likewise, I can also confirm that the particular reconstruction of Northern Hemisphere temperatures over the past millennium (the so-called “Hockey Stick”), which subsequently came in for considerable criticism, was not in any way central to the conclusions of the 2001 Assessment regarding attribution of causes of recent warming. We were aware of these proxy climate reconstructions, but did not give them much weight in the attribution assessment because the statistical methods used were (and arguably still are) rather opaque. I remember specific discussions among the attribution chapter authors questioning the error budgets of those reconstructions, and concluding that it would be premature to rely on them too heavily. With the benefit of hindsight, these discussions seem remarkable prescient, and confirm the importance of scientific judgment in the IPCC process. &#xa0;7. The problem with IPCC’s response to criticisms of previous assessments is that the focus has been entirely on formalizing procedures, whereas the reports ultimately depend on the collective scientific judgment of IPCC authors and reviewers. In some respects, tighter procedures may even have a distorting effect, particularly when coupled with the infrequency of IPCC reports. For example, I am aware of two papers (on one of which I was a co-author) being accepted on the day of the deadline for inclusion in the IPCC 5th Assessment, both of which provided evidence for a downward revision of the uncertainty range for climate sensitivity. A third paper, providing evidence for a higher value for climate sensitivity, was accepted two days later, and hence could not be included. The fact that the first two papers and not the third contribute to the official consensus view on climate sensitivity for the next six years is clearly absurd.&#xa0;To what extent does AR5 reflect the range of views among climate scientists?&#xa0;8. In chapters that I have been involved in I have seen a painstaking effort to reflect the full range of views among climate scientists. If anything, authors probably take more care to discuss and reflect ‘skeptical’ than ‘alarmist’ views, for obvious reasons. The reputational cost of being seen as naïve or politically motivated is far greater than the cost of being seen as over-cautious.&#xa0;Can any of the areas of the science now be considered settled as a result of AR5’s publication, if so which?  What areas need further effort to reduce the levels of uncertainty?&#xa0;9. It is unhealthy to declare any area of science finally settled: I welcome the fact that there are still a few scientists questioning the theory of relativity, although I feel no inclination to join them. Likewise, the fact that greenhouse gas emissions are having a substantial impact on climate at a global scale is sufficiently well attested that further research into alternative hypotheses is unlikely to be particularly fruitful, although it should of course be encouraged to continue. &#xa0;10. The most obvious and important area in which further effort is required to reduce uncertainty is the implications of these global changes for regional climate and extreme weather events. It is shameful, in my view, that we are still unable as a community to quantify the role of human influence on high-impact events like Typhoon Haiyan. The IPCC process may inadvertently have contributed to this situation through its focus (mandated by the commissioning governments) on long-term projections of global climate change, which are necessarily reliant on coarse-resolution models.&#xa0;How effective is AR5 and the summary for policymakers in conveying what is meant by uncertainty in scientific terms? Would a focus on risk rather than uncertainty be useful?&#xa0;11. This is a question for a user of IPCC reports rather than an author.&#xa0;Does the AR5 address the reliability of climate models?&#xa0;12. This question is so broad that almost any answer is possible. Yes, the IPCC does consider the reliability of climate models and finds they are much more reliable for some variables (like global temperature) than others (like local precipitation). If the question is posed as “are the models reliable in all respects”, the answer is trivially “no”. The global coupled climate models that form the backbone of these assessments are found to be consistently unreliable in their representation of extreme weather, which is the main reason we are unable to say more at present about human influence on weather extremes. &#xa0;Has AR5 sufficiently explained the reasons behind the widely reported hiatus in the global surface temperature record?&#xa0;13. The AR5 has demonstrated there are a number of possible reasons for the hiatus and concluded that there is insufficient evidence to attribute it to any specific cause. Temperature trends over a 15-year period have limited relevance to constraining long-term climate projections, and average temperatures over the past decade have been precisely in line with projections made back in the 1990s. That said, the fact that the very rapid warming between the mid-1990s and the first half of the 2000s has not continued does provide some evidence that the highest responses in the current generation of climate models are unrealistic, and this is reflected in the AR5 projections of near-term warming. It also contributed to (although it was not the main factor in) the decision to reduce the lower bound of Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity to 1.5 degrees.&#xa0;Do the AR5 Physical Science Basis report’s conclusions strengthen or weaken the economic case for action to prevent dangerous climate change?&#xa0;14. The key conclusion that strengthens the case for some actions to prevent dangerous climate change is the fact that cumulative emissions of carbon dioxide emissions over the entire industrial epoch are the main determinant of eventual warming, not emissions in any given year or commitment period. This highlights the importance of policies to address the long-term stock of fossil carbon, as opposed to measures to control the flow of greenhouse gas emissions that are the focus of almost all climate policies at present. &#xa0;15. As an aside, it seems strange to ask about the economic implications of a report that is explicitly and exclusively focused on Physical Science. This question might be more appropriate when the Assessments of Working Groups 2 and 3 are available.&#xa0;What implications do the IPCC’s conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report have for policy making both nationally and internationally?&#xa0;16. Both UK and international climate policy are exclusively focused on reducing the flow of emissions in the relatively short term, out to 2030 or so. This is resulting in a dangerous underinvestment in technologies like carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) that are relatively expensive as short-term emission reduction measures. These technologies will, however, almost certainly be required eventually if we are to limit warming to two or even three degrees, given the overwhelming economic incentives to burn more fossil fuels than can be released into the atmosphere consistent with these temperature goals.&#xa0;Is the IPCC process an effective mechanism for assessing scientific knowledge? Or has it focused on providing a justification for political commitment?&#xa0;17. The response of participants in the UNFCCC process to the cumulative carbon budget conclusion is very instructive. Negotiators have been openly critical of the IPCC for what they see as an “unhelpful framing” of the problem. This illustrates that the IPCC is doing its job of highlighting important policy-relevant science, not simply providing justification for any particular political decision.&#xa0;To what extent did political intervention influence the final conclusions of the AR5 Physical Science Basis summary?&#xa0;18. I was not involved in the Stockholm plenary, but the revisions agreed following the final government review stage did not impact the core conclusions of the report.&#xa0;Is the rate at which the UK Government intends to cut CO2 emissions appropriate in light of the findings of the IPCC AR5 Physical Science Basis report?&#xa0;19. The problem is not so much the rate as the manner of these reductions. The AR5 report highlights the critical importance of option value. There has been no substantial reduction in the overall uncertainty in the climate response: the increase in the range of uncertainty in equilibrium climate sensitivity was approximately compensated for by a modest reduction in uncertainty in the transient response. At the same time, the cumulative carbon budget demonstrates that, regardless of whether the response is at the high or low end of the current uncertainty range, emissions will eventually have to be reduced to zero if dangerous climate change is to be avoided. &#xa0;20. Hence policies should focus on the development of technologies that would allow rapid and substantial reductions in global emissions in the future, should they prove necessary. If this is at the expense of investment in short-term emission reduction measures, which might ultimately prove unnecessary if the response is at the low end of the current range, then so be it. &#xa0;21. To put it bluntly, we already know the costs and externalities of wind power. Rapid deployment of wind power in the UK and Germany today will therefore make relatively little difference to the options we have available for dealing with climate change on a global scale in the 2030s. We have much less idea about the relative merits of different CO2 geological storage options, which will take decades to evaluate. If temperatures reach 1.5 degrees and global emissions are proving impossible to reduce through substitution measures, we are likely to need the option of deploying CCS on a very large-scale. The way things are going, we won’t have it, because we are pouring subsidies into windmills instead. &#xa0;What relevance do the IPCC’s conclusions have in respect of the review of the fourth Carbon Budget?&#xa0;22. Reiterating the points made above, it is imperative that the Carbon Budget review should take into account the need to limit the overall stock of global carbon emissions in setting technology priorities. An exclusive focus on reducing the flow of emissions in the short to medium term has become counterproductive.&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;