&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Carbon Tracker (IPC0038)]]]The UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s 5th Assessment Report supported the use of global carbon budgets, amidst a level of consensus from the global scientific community that is stronger than ever that global warming is exacerbated by man-made emissions.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[About Carbon Tracker]]]Carbon Tracker is a non-profit organisation working to align the capital markets with the climate change policy agenda. We are applying our thinking on carbon budgets and stranded assets across geographies and asset classes to inform investor thinking and the regulation of capital markets. We are funded by a number of US and UK charitable foundations. 

[[[Introduction]]]Carbon Tracker welcomes the Energy and Climate Change Committee’s call for a discussion around the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) latest report as it provides an opportunity to ensure the weight of its findings are not understated. Carbon Tracker’s research hypothesises a systemic risk sitting on the world’s capital markets due to the mismatch between climate change policy and the business models of listed coal, oil and gas companies. This has been illustrated by adopting a carbon budget approach – a comparison between the amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions we can emit to have a good chance to limit global warming to the internationally agreed level of 2°C – the carbon budget – and the embedded CO2 sitting in the coal, oil and gas reserves owned by fossil fuel companies. We conclude that between 60 and 80% of reserves must stay in the ground and are ‘unburnable’. This has been supported by the IEA’s analysis that at least two thirds of the world’s fossil fuel reserves cannot be burnt unmitigated to have a 50% chance of achieving the 2°C target.The IPCC’s latest research marks a significant event for this way of thinking about future climate change because of the inclusion of a carbon budget analysis. Their findings are consistent with those of Carbon Tracker’s research. The support of the scientific community behind the ‘unburnable carbon’ thesis and the risks associated with the incorrect valuation of fossil fuel reserves that can not be burnt, provides a significant reminder of the actions that need to be taken to transition to a low-carbon economy in a financially stable manner. For investors and governments this also raises questions around where funds are spent going forward.

[[[Do the AR5 Physical Science Basis report’s conclusions strengthen or weaken the economic case for action to prevent dangerous climate change? ]]]Looking at the economics of acting on climate change was not the remit of the Physical Science Basis report, but more the report being produced by the IPCC Working Group III set for release in April 2014 which will look specifically at the costs and benefits of different climate change mitigation options. However, the Physical Science Basis report reveals the disparity between our current pathway and that of a safe level of climate change. This gives an indication of the level of ‘effort’ required to close the gap, from which you can get a sense of economic cost. We see the conclusions of the IPCC’s Working Group I (WGI) AR5 report to strengthen the case for action to prevent dangerous climate change, in spite of its prediction for a lower level of climate sensitivity than their AR4 report.In the AR5 report the IPCC lowered its estimate of transient climate response to carbon emissions (TCRE) – climate sensitivity – from their 2007 report by 25%. While this translates into a reduction in the rate of warming, emissions are currently rising approximately 1.9% each year, meaning any resulting benefit that a lower sensitivity is more than balanced out by rising emissions. The authors indicate this by stating that ‘if the same level of effort required in 2010 to limit carbon dioxide-induced warming to two degrees were applied starting in 2015, the resultant peak warming would be 10% higher, at 2.2°C’. In other words, the longer we delay emissions cuts, the faster those cuts will have to be to stay within the 2°C budget. In turn, the faster the cuts have to be, the harder and more costly they are, echoing the sentiments introduced by the Stern Review in 2006. The issue of uncertainty around climate sensitivity has meant some have called for hesitancy before we commit economic resources to act. However, as Martin Wolf, chief economics commentator at the Financial Times, wrote at the end of November, we should do exactly the opposite. ‘[Climate] sceptics argue as if uncertainty means that the right thing to do is nothing. On a foggy road, the number and speed of other cars is particularly uncertain. But this very ignorance makes cautious driving essential. The same applied to climate. Given the uncertainties about the climate system, the wisest course is surely to drive cautiously.’As such, the IPCC’s most recent findings certainly strengthen the economic case for action. The speed at which this action happens is equivalent to the ‘choice between stranding those [fossil fuel] assets or stranding the planet’, as stated by the OECD Secretary-General, Angel Gurria.

[[[What implications do the IPCC’s conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report have for policy making both nationally and internationally? ]]]Perhaps the most vocal proponent of the carbon budget approach advocated by the IPCC is Lord Stern, the former World Bank chief economist and author of the landmark study of the economics of global warming, who says ‘If we continue to increase annual emissions, the budget will be depleted even sooner. I think nations, cities, communities and companies will recognise the important of these findings and will increase the urgency and scale of the emissions reduction that they are planning to undertake.’  This sentiment has been backed by a number of individuals including Richard Klein, a scientist with the Stockholm Environment Institute and an IPCC author, who says ‘the potential for increased transparency and accountability that the carbon budget affords may spur some countries to take a second look at their pledges, and encourage others to do the same’; Tim Yeo, a Conservative MP believes ‘the publication of a carbon budget by the IPCC increases the urgency and importance of the UN process and future COP meetings. Work should start at once on the establishment of a fair apportionment of emissions country by country’.This final point provides a potentially crucial stumbling block for the influence of the IPCC’s carbon budget in policymaking. Discussion around equity between developed and developing nations, and what weighting should be attributed to historical or present emissions, is already the key area of disagreement in international negotiations. Some see attempting to apportion a carbon budget to each emitter as complicating this process further. Christiana Figueres, executive director of the UNFCCC said in the run up to the recent COP19 in Warsaw, ‘I don’t think it is possible [to allocate carbon budgets]. Politically it would be very difficult. I don’t know who would hold the pen.’The UK Government has a leading position in that it has adopted carbon budgets which outline a pathway to achieving emissions reductions, as agreed in the Climate Change Act. There is a continuing challenge for those budgets to be translated into other policy measures. Delivering the emissions cuts will require an energy transition, which will in turn need financing. This means that investment in the necessary infrastructure must be incentivised by government intervention or the market frameworks that direct capital. It is clear that continuing reliance on fossil fuels is not compatible with achieving the carbon budgets. It is therefore contradictory to continue subsidies for fossil fuel based energy. For example tax-breaks and subsidies which promote the mature industry of hydrocarbon extraction are not consistent with the treatment being applied to renewables, where subsidies are tapered off as the costs of the new technologies comes down over time, (eg solar feed-in tariffs). The UK’s oil and gas production is not large enough to influence global commodity prices of oil and gas. Therefore there is no benefit for consumers of subsidising UK exploration and production, as it will not bring down energy bills. The current financial system is also not compatible with achieving climate change targets. It has been well documented that short-termism, models which are based on historical performance, and rise of passive investing tracking the market leaves most institutional investors holding the incumbents, rather than driving the energy transition. Some efforts are underway to package clean energy in suitable investment vehicles such as green bonds, and to provide funding through the Green Investment Bank. However, the other side of the equation is not being addressed. The risks and uncertainty which surround the future of fossil fuels are not being reflected by the market, as it continues to assume that emissions will rise and revenues will continue to flow as demand and prices are not affected. The financial system needs to stress test itself against different emissions scenarios, as well as using economic variables.The Climate Change Act also gives powers covering adaptation reporting. We believe it would be timely to have reports on how the energy system and the financial regulator is adapting to delivering the carbon budget. This is not just how they are adapting to the impacts of climate change, but also to the changes required to mitigate climate change.

[[[What relevance do the IPCC’s conclusions have in respe]]]

[[[ct of the review of the fourth Carbon Budget?]]]While a review of the carbon budget does not mean a change will be made, it is clearly a possibility. Consequently, it is worth noting that in theory it can only be altered if there have been significant change in the circumstances on which the budget was set, demonstrated by evidence and analysis. The Committee on Climate Change have advised that there have been no significant changes in climate science or international efforts to cut emissions that could warrant a weakening of the carbon budget.With the findings of the latest IPCC report, this is not in doubt. In fact, the IPCC’s conclusions could help force a strengthening of the fourth carbon budget given in many respects, they are their starkest yet.  The AR5 report concluded that global warming is ‘unequivocal’, is at least 95% sure that this trend is caused by human activity and temperatures could reach 4.8°C higher than 1990 levels by 2100 if global emissions continue on their current trajectory. These findings are likely to be influential in policymaking at all levels. Therefore, any weakening of carbon budget restrictions in the UK would diverge from much ambition at EU and international level, exacerbating the system-level shock which would be necessary at a later date. Translating the carbon budget into the UK’s energy and financial systems will place the UK in a leadership position, as it will already be adapting to a low carbon future and be able to maximise its opportunities. The alternative is that the UK will be left with infrastructure which is incompatible with our legislated climate targets, which will become stranded assets and represent a waste of capital for taxpayers and investors.December 2013&#xa0; http://www.carbontracker.org/wastedcapital  http://www.climatechange2013.org/images/uploads/WGI_AR5_SPM_brochure.pdf  http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/cd519de0-55e1-11e3-96f5-00144feabdc0.html?siteedition=uk#axzz2lmUa4Tkf  http://www.oecd.org/about/secretary-general/the-climate-challenge-achieving-zero-emissions.htm  http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/29/carbon-budget-talks-urgent-ipcc-lord-stern  http://www.irinnews.org/report/98891/will-the-climate-change-in-warsaw  http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/29/carbon-budget-talks-urgent-ipcc-lord-stern  http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/24/ipcc-carbon-budget-warsaw-climate-change-christiana-figueres  https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/adapting-to-climate-change http://www.theccc.org.uk/pressreleases/committee-on-climate-change-assessment-of-science-and-international-circumstances-reinforces-existing-fourth-carbon-budget/ 