&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by James Painter]]]

[[[ (IPC0044)]]]1. The Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism (RISJ) is part of the Department of Politics and International Relations at the University of Oxford.  It was established in 2006. The RISJ aims to serve as a leading forum for a productive engagement between scholars from a wide range of disciplines and the practitioners of journalism.  It aims to bring the depth of academic scholarship to major issues of relevance to the practice of the news media. 2. The RISJ regularly publishes reports and books on various issues affecting the media.  On the specific issue of climate change, James Painter has published three recent works:  Summoned by Science: Reporting Climate Change at Copenhagen and Beyond (2010); Poles Apart: the international reporting of climate scepticism (2011); and Climate Change in the Media:&#xa0;reporting&#xa0;risk and uncertainty (September 2013).&#xa0; 3. This submission draws on the research contained in Climate Change in the Media, which includes detailed discussion of the way the last round of IPCC reports in 2007 were reported around the world.  It focuses on the way uncertainty and risk were conveyed in around 350 articles in the print media in 18 newspapers in six countries, including the UK, with a combined readership of 15 million.  The book also includes a lengthy discussion of the different types of uncertainties surrounding climate change, and the possible advantages of framing the issue as one of risk management.4. In October 2013, the RISJ also published another study on risk and uncertainty reporting in climate change and other sectors like health, which summarised what we know about the particular challenges of communicating such difficult issues for the general public. (Ashe, October 2013)  This publication drew on a conference held the previous year on the same topic which drew together academics, scientists and practitioners from different fields. 

[[[5]]]

[[[. The committee asks: ]]]

[[[How effective is AR5 and the summary for policymakers in conveying]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[what i]]]

[[[s meant by uncertainty in scientific terms? Would a focus on risk rather than uncertainty be useful?]]]6. The first point to make is that the Working Group-1 (WG-1) report of the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) explicitly contained a large number of uncertainties about climate change in its Summary for Policy Makers (SPM).  The draft version contained the word ‘uncertainty’ or ‘uncertainties’ 42 times in just 31 pages, although this was reduced to 36 by the time the final, shorter version was issued. (Doyle, September 2013)7.  Laying out these uncertainties is the appropriate task of such a report and reflects the way the way climate science is conducted.  But there are several problems when communicating such scientific uncertainties to a wider audience, whether they are policy makers, the media, or the wider public.  More resources, training and analysis need to be directed at thinking through and implementing effective communication about uncertainty by climate scientists and other bodies.  One key obstacle remains that the IPCC still only employs two professional communicators. 8.  If by ‘effective’ in the question we mean ‘improving understanding’, then there is substantial evidence that scientific uncertainty can be a difficult concept to grasp.  It is often misunderstood by the general public who can interpret it to imply complete, rather than relative, lack of knowledge – or in other words, ignorance.   Many fail to make the distinction between what some call ‘school science’, which is a source of solid facts and reliable understanding, and ‘research science’ where uncertainty is engrained and is often the impetus for further investigation.  (Painter, 2013)9.  Research carried out both in the USA and the UK suggests that messages of uncertainty too can be an obstacle to public engagement.  If scientists constantly talk about uncertainty, often the response of the listener is not necessarily apathy but lapsing into an unhappy situation of not knowing how to proceed, and therefore discounting or dodging the problem.  Or some can even get angry when scientists don’t know things.  (Shuckburgh et al, 2012)10.  The way the IPCC reports present uncertainties using ranges of probabilities and assigning confidence levels has also been shown to be problematic.  It is highly laudable that the scientists are attempting to quantify the uncertainties to help decision making, but there may well be a mismatch with public understanding unless these concepts are clearly explained.11. For example, research in the USA about the communication of the 2007 IPCC reports strongly suggests that there can be a big discrep&#xad;ancy between the meaning the IPCC intended, and the con&#xad;clu&#xad;sion people actu&#xad;ally drew.  In particular, they found that the public consistently misinterpret the IPCC’s probabilistic statements, and usually in a ‘regressive’ way, or in other words, less extreme than intended by the authors of the reports.  So for example, when the IPCC writes that ‘many changes in the global climate system during the 21st century &lt;…&gt; would very likely be larger than those observed during the 20th century’, the IPCC intends this to mean more than 90% probability, whereas the typical respondent interpreted this to mean a 65-75% probability. (Budescu et al, 2009)12. Other criticisms of the IPCC’s portrayal of uncertainties are that it is too complicated; too confusing (because the intervals overlap); links numbers to words which can also be an impediment to understanding; and ignores affect (how people feel about what they are reading).  (Ashe 2013, quoting Professor Chris Rapley)13.  It is not clear that even the expression ‘it is 95 per cent certain that humans are mostly to blame for temperatures that have climbed since 1951’ is well understood.  In the context of this statement, one IPCC author was asked on the BBC by the presenter on the day of the release of WG-1 ‘what the other 5 per cent of scientists believed?’.  In other words, there was a confusion between what the authors of the WG-1 report collectively had concluded was true with a very high degree of certainty and what percentage of scientists were in agreement with the statement. 14. More explanation is needed about what the phrase ’95 per cent certain’ means.   Few people may know that such an expression in the scientific world is often taken as a gold standard for ‘certainty’ and can be likened to the degree of confidence scientists have in decades’ worth of evidence that cigarettes are deadly.  (Borenstein, September 2013)15.  Another problem with highlighting the scientific uncertainties is that some journalists or writers of opinion pieces in the media report the uncertainties extensively, or misreport them, in order to cast doubt on the science, the IPCC or the implications of it.  Some media organisations may play them up to follow an editorial line of justifying not taking action on curbing greenhouse gas emissions. &#xa0;16.  The RISJ study of the way the 2007 IPCC reports were reported in the print media around the world showed that the media were not very good at explaining how the IPCC measured uncertainty. About 40 per cent of the articles included the IPCC concepts of likelihood and confidence levels but only 15 per cent included an explanation of what they actually meant &#xa0;- such as 'very likely' meaning more than a 90 per cent probability. &#xa0;&#xa0;(We are in the process of studying the 2013 IPCC report, so we cannot tell yet how widely these concepts were reported this time around).17. Journalists interviewed for the study gave lots of good reasons to explain this - such as readers or viewers not liking or understanding numbers - or the difficulties of concepts such as 'medium confidence'. &#xa0;Some of them agreed that one of the essential challenges remains to explain to a general public that uncertainty (in a scientific context) does not mean ignorance, and uncertainty can be quantified, particularly to help decision-making.&#xa0;18.  There is a growing body of literature suggesting that risk language may be a good, or at least a less bad, way of communicating climate change to policy makers and the general public.   Many argue that when compared to the messages of disaster or uncertainty that often surround climate change, risk is far from being a panacea, but it does offer a more sophisticated and apposite language to have the discussion in and a more helpful prism through which to analyse the problem.  19. One of the arguments in favour of using risk language is that for policy makers, it shifts the debate away from what would count as conclusive proof or overwhelming certainty before taking action, towards an analysis of the comparative costs and risks of different policy options (including doing nothing).  20. Another is that risk is an essential part of everyday experience, including the worlds of insurance, health and investment.   Many people have to deal with it daily and manage it in different ways: most people in the developed world take out house insurance against the low-probability, very high-impact event of a fire.  Patients are increasingly familiar with the concept of the risks and benefits of different health treatments (though they rely on trusted intermediaries to help them to navigate the risk).&#xa0;  Investors constantly use the language of risk, and one top UK banker at HSBC reacted to the WG-1 report by describing climate change as essentially an ‘issue of strategic risk management’.  And some of the risk assessments people make are on the same timescale as possible climate impacts – for example, taking out a pension policy into which they pay for 40 years. 21.  It is certainly the case that risk language is now often being used by politicians and other science communicators.  By risk language, we mean such every day phrases 'taking out an insurance policy', ‘loading the dice' or 'playing Russian roulette with the climate'. &#xa0;David Cameron, Michael Bloomberg and Lord Nick Stern have all recently used such language as a helpful way of describing the problem and the need to take action.  Lord Stern for example argues that sceptics have to show they have high confidence the planet is going to experience only the lower end of possible temperature increases for them to make their case that it is not necessary to take action to minimise climate risks.22. Risk concepts in a narrow sense of assigning probability levels to adverse consequences are important for a better understanding of climate science.   For example, climate models can now evaluate how much man-made climate change may have made an extreme weather event like a severe flood or drought more likely.  Such risk assessments usually include probability levels, and what degree of confidence scientists have in their findings.   23.  However, even though risk language and concepts should be generally welcomed, a number of caveats should be made.  First, some metaphors work better than others, and need to be constantly tested.  ‘Loading the dice’ for example, has been shown to work well in the USA, but not so well in the UK where the practice of playing dice is not so widespread.  (Shuckburgh et al, 2012)Secondly, there is little research done with focus groups on how they react to risk language and concepts about climate change, in terms of understanding, engagement and behaviour change.  Intuitively many observers may feel that risk language would work with a wider audience, who are accustomed to risk from the worlds of insurance, betting, health and investment. However, there's a need to test this more. &#xa0;Moreover, many people may find the numerical assignment of probabilities to possible risks difficult to understand or use as a basis for action. Thirdly, it understandable that the authors of report on the physical science (WG-1) shied away from using risk language.&#xa0; They argue that they prefer to use ‘likelihoods’ as it is a more neutral and quantifiable language; they say risk on the other hand is a more qualitative language and implies only bad outcomes whereas some outcomes from climate change may be beneficial to a limited extent.&#xa0;24. However, there is already evidence that the Working Group Two (WG-2) report on climate impacts will probably have much more risk language in it, as the IPCC 2012 report on extreme weather events did. &#xa0;(Doyle, November 2013) This is in part explained by the different science disciplines involved, but also by the greater acceptance that the impact of extreme weather events are likely to be negative, and therefore 'risky' in the sense of a negative outcome.&#xa0;25.  Finally, It is worth drawing more on the literature and practical experience of climate scientists on how to communicate the uncertainties effectively.  Many climate scientists used to dealing with the media and policy makers stressed that they have found it helpful to start with what they were very sure about - for example, that temperatures are going up, that it's largely caused by human activity and that many of the impacts are likely to be negative - before explaining the areas of uncertainty. &#xa0;26.  There is also a lot of work being done in general in the media on the use of info-graphics in expressing risk and uncertainty around climate science and other scientific issues. There are already some good examples of representing risk and uncertainty - and much more could be done. In many cases, visual presentations of uncertainty can be better than text for effective communication and public understanding. &#xa0;&#xa0;27. References: Ashe, Teresa. ‘How the Media Report Scientific Risk and Uncertainty: A review of the Literature’.  RISJ, October 2013.Borenstein, Seth.  ‘What 95% certainty of warming means to scientists’.  Associated Press, 24 September 2013. Budescu, D. V., Broomell, S. B. &amp; Por, H. ‘Improving communication of uncertainty in the reports of the IPCC’.  Psychol. Sci. 20, 299–308 (2009).Doyle, Alister. ‘Amid Uncertainty, scientists blame mankind for global warming’. Reuters, 18 September 2013.Doyle, Alister.  ‘UN draft stresses risk of global warming, from economy to health’.  Reuters, 8 November 2013. Painter, James.  ‘Climate Change in the Media: Reporting Risk and Uncertainty’.  RISJ, September 2013. Shuckburgh, Emily, Rosie Robison, and Nick Pidgeon.   ‘Climate Science, the Public and the News Media: Summary Findings of a Survey and Focus Groups Conducted in the UK in March 2011’. Living With Environmental Change, September 28th, 2012.December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;