&#xa0;Written evidence from John Trueman (CYS 093)&#xa0;This submission comprises personal observations from cycle touring in England and Wales, June-September 2013.&#xa0;Item 1 is general. Items 2-9 concern inter-town cycling. Items 10-14 concern in-town cycling. Item 15 addresses the particular idea of time-sharing some roads.&#xa0;Summary&#xa0;&#xa0;General1. UK drivers are much more considerate of cyclists than are their counterparts in Canberra or Sydney. My observations suggest that where problems exist they stem from inappropriate infrastructure not driver or rider attitudes. &#xa0;Cycling Out of town2. The basic road network of the UK is set up for motor vehicles only. This may be because 20th century road engineers did not consider bicycles a legitimate form of transport and did not take them into account when designing the roads. Whatever the reason, the challenge now is to retro-fit the network to accommodate not only conventional bicycles but other emerging light vehicle technologies, of which there are several, long-term dependence on cars being unsustainable.&#xa0;3. Motorways and trunk A-roads are ideally placed for long-distance light vehicle travel but are not open to or are incompatible with cycling. This is unfortunate as even your longest inter-city distances are quite short. London to Bristol, for example, could take a day by pedal cycle. With the existing infrastructure it takes three days. The road reserves for M- and trunk- roads are plenty wide enough to accommodate a cycle path on one side, yet very few such roads do. I hear the original Severn Crossing is nearing the end of its life, and yet the Second Severn Crossing makes no provision at all for cycles or light vehicles. If the M48 Severn Bridge were to close the cycling distance from London to Cardiff would be increased by a day.&#xa0;4. Most A-roads between towns, especially those with one- and two-digit road numbers, are too dangerous for cycling. Many run in narrow road corridors with scarcely room for two lanes of motor traffic. Retro-fitting these would involve widening the corridor or at least flattening and paving the verge. Whether that would be an appropriate thing to do should depend on local factors, for example, on whether there is a nearby alternative route that bicycles could use. Not all roads need to be made cyclable, just as not all laneways need be wide enough for HGVs. Various significant tourist sites, for example Stonehenge, Silbury Hill and the Kennett Long Barrow, cannot at present be accessed safely by bicycle, yet minor modifications to short sections of A-road are all that is needed.&#xa0;5. Most B-roads out of town are safe for cycling, chiefly because the traffic is lighter. (Exceptions occur. For example the B4455 Fosse Way through Warwickshire is as dangerous as many A-roads.) However, so few people ride between towns that motorists do not expect to come across a cyclist. The safety of B-roads and ‘minor’ A-roads would improve if more cyclists used them.&#xa0;6. Many towns are linked not only by an A- or B-road but also by unclassified roads. Such roads tend to be narrow and are slow enough for motor vehicles and bicycles to co-exist safely. These indirect routes are readily cyclable and pleasant to ride on. In hilly country, however, there may be only one road between two towns, and if that happens to be a ‘fast’ A-road there is no safe cycle route. &#xa0;7. UK Inter-town distances are very short and well within the capabilities of any cyclist. There ought to be much more local-area cycling than I observed. Without some inter-town cycling infrastructure, however, this is not going to happen. There are many places where simple, cheap and effective inter-town cycling infrastructure could be installed. The design has to suit cycling, though, and not be tokenistic. On-road lanes are far more useful than off-road constructions that twist and turn, start and stop, go up kerbs, have walk-only sections, and so on (see 14). Some rural sections of main road have a pedestrian path alongside, although it is often neglected and overgrown. Such paths if cleared and maintained could be easily adapted to pedestrian plus cycle use.&#xa0;8. Linked-up-ness is extremely important to the safety of a cycle network. A single im-passable junction or a hundred yards of un-cyclable road can destroy an otherwise useable route.  I came across examples where one council has made a bike lane up to its boundary but the adjoining council hasn’t. This sort of thing leaves the inter-town cyclist high and dry. Linked-up-ness needs co-operation.&#xa0;9. Information about cyclable out-of-town routes is hard to come by. An assumption seems to be that all cyclists live locally and know the local routes. In particular, there is lack of information about which A- and B-roads are cyclable and which are not. Cycling charities such as SUSTRANS are designing a network of recommended routes but they tend to pick the most scenic and meandering of the alternatives. Their routes cover only a tiny fraction of what is cyclable while their maps focus chiefly on their preferred routes. Some money put into a map of cyclable through routes, including routes on the A- and B- network, would be of great benefit to the touring cyclist. Such a map could also help identify where short, cheap, simple improvements could join the dots and make inter-town and long distance cycling more accessible for all.&#xa0;In-town cycling10. Roads in provincial towns, whether nominally A-, B- or unclassified, are generally cyclable. Traffic is slow, obstacles such as parked cars, turning vehicles, pedestrians, traffic lights, pedestrian crossings and speed bumps keep things that way, and motor traffic and bicycles can very easily co-exist. Motorists need to be aware that cycles have to go around drains and that sort of thing. Cyclists need to be aware that holding up a car for a few extra seconds can be very frustrating for the motorist.&#xa0;11. Cities have an extra class of road, the cross-city through route. It is the urban equivalent of a trunk road. These roads are highly dangerous. I would not cycle on them. The problem, as usual, is they were planned and constructed without thought to bicycles as a means of transport and they make no concessions to the needs of cyclists. Some cities have attempted to retro-fit cycle lanes but these often stop when the going gets tough, for example at junctions or where the carriageway is narrow, so they merely pay a token nod to cycling. Bad retro-fits like that do not decrease the danger. The road corridor, though, is often wide enough that a proper cycle route could be fitted, and if this were done such a route, whether on-road or not, would be safe.&#xa0;12. Road junctions are one of the least friendly aspects of cycling in towns and cities. Very many junctions have been designed without any thought to how a cyclist might negotiate them. Some of the bigger roundabouts simply cannot be negotiated. Having one of those in a route negates the entire route. There is usually room to cater for bicycles (and other light vehicles) if the road engineers had considered them. Where the engineering has gone out of its way to make life difficult for the bike rider there are bound to be problems but I’ve yet to see a junction where a bike compatible design could not be implemented. That said, a minimally bike compatible design is not the same as a fair-for-all design. I came across one junction where the cyclist is expected to push seven crossing buttons and wait seven times (14 minutes?) to go straight on. It’s no wonder some cyclists take their chance on the road.&#xa0;13. Cities and larger towns sometimes have mixed cycling and bus lanes. These are less than ideal from the safety angle since bicycles and buses are of very different sizes and have very different driving characteristics: buses accelerate well and cruise at 30mph but keep stopping, bicycles accelerate poorly and cruise at 10-15mph; so the two kinds of vehicle in the same lane get in each other’s way. These mixed lanes are not so much inherently unsafe as frustrating and annoying, but frustration and annoyance breed danger.&#xa0;14. Most town and city off-road cycle lanes and joint pedestrian/cycle lanes are of limited use to cyclists as currently configured. They stop and start in unexpected ways. They are very poorly signed – only a local would know where they go. The beginnings invariably are unmarked for the approaching on-road cyclist and are very easily missed, even impossible, sometimes, to turn into. These off-road paths typically involve steep grades and rough surfaces while the cyclist must stop to negotiate driveways, road crossings, kerbs and the like and quite often is expected to get off and walk at junctions or bus stops. They are not a serious cycling transport alternative, except they can be a safe ‘pavement cycling’ alternative near schools. Motorists often get annoyed when a cyclist uses the road instead of an adjacent off-road path, but there is usually a good reason why they do.&#xa0;Time-sharing with HGVs15. I have seen the suggestion that certain routes in London should be time-shared. This might make cycling safer at non-HGV times but would not make it safer at other times when the road is still shared and might make it less safe if HGV and other drivers assume there will be no bicycles on the road outside of the ‘no-HGV’ times. These roads will be of the urban through-route class (my para 11), equivalent in danger to an A-trunk road. Time-sharing ought only to be considered a stopgap solution to what is in essence a local, although still a very serious, problem. Any permanent solution ought to involve reconfiguring the road, perhaps along with nearby parallel roads, to be bicycle/light vehicle compatible. &#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;