&#xa0;

[[[Written Evidence Submitted by the CLA]]]The CLA is a membership organisation which represents 33,000 landowners and farmers as such the provision of food is very important to our membership. &#xa0;1.1 All the major policy affecting food security in this country is decided at EU level, the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), the EU Common External Tariff (i.e. trade policy) and many other EU directives, governing almost all environmental policy. This means Defra must provide leadership in Europe to shape emerging EU policy on food security.&#xa0;1.2 The CLA pressed for the implementation of the latest reform of the CAP 2014-2020 to ensure that European agriculture is in a position to produce as much food as it can, sustainably, and in response to market signals. The CAP also has a role in providing incentives and mechanisms to encourage farming that uses less water and fossil fuels, produces less greenhouse gas emissions, does not degrade soils and manages nitrogen use better. &#xa0;1.3 Land is a limited commodity; the total size of the UK is 24 million hectares, 76% of which is dedicated to agriculture.  Land conversion is a large source of greenhouse gas emissions, and perhaps the greatest source of biodiversity loss. The optimal land use mix for any given area will depend on local conditions. It wouldn’t be feasible or environmentally beneficial to plough up UK uplands to try and grow grains and vegetables. Instead, this land could be used for low input livestock systems or converted to woodland. &#xa0;1.4 Climate change is likely to mean a reduction in agricultural land, through processes such as sea level rise and changes in rainfall patterns. We need to understand better how efficient different food types are in terms of their land use. We know that in the UK, as in most of northern Europe, organic crop yields can be 40%–50% lower than conventional farming, and labour use can be 10%–25% higher. &#xa0;1.5 Producing sufficient food is only part of the challenge the world faces, the implications of the way in which it is produced are equally important. The only acceptable form of food production is that which meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs. Sustainable production is not the preserve of any one method of farming&#xa0;1.6 Maximising food production does not rely solely on agriculture; there will be knock on impacts along the food supply chain, e.g. on infrastructure-transport systems and food storage. How this will be managed needs further consideration.&#xa0;1.7 UK public-sector research into food and farming is still world-class in some respects. However, there is an urgent need to: &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;2.1 The market price of food reflects commercial supply and demand factors.  However, it is the intention of the retail sector to ensure that the cost of food products to the consumer is kept as low as possible. This necessarily will have an impact on the ability of producers to match the demands from supermarkets.  &#xa0;2.2 Producers wish to see higher food prices in order to maintain viable margins. For farmers, where input prices have often risen at a rate above inflation, static pricing or even reduced returns, makes it harder for farmers to compete.&#xa0;2.3 In this sense, the issue to resolve is essentially that between the producer and the retailer. This should not exempt the impact of other parties in the food supply chain, such as processors or packagers. &#xa0;2.4 The CLA believes it is incumbent on the retail sector to ensure the relationship between the producer and the retailer is both fair and equitable. To make farming more sustainable, there needs to be an equitable share of risk and profit along the food supply chain, and some form of investment from the larger retailers in the producer’s business, to help secure the ability to supply. Whilst it is accepted that a cheap food policy is being pursued by the Government, there has to be a realisation that the increasing costs of producing food will lead to many exiting the industry, which is a threat to food security.&#xa0;2.5 The Groceries Code Adjudicator must enforce the Groceries Supply Code of Practice.  This should ensure that retailers do not transfer excessive risk and unexpected costs to their direct suppliers. This would otherwise impact on suppliers’ willingness to invest, quality and innovation, leading to potential consumer detriment.&#xa0;2.6 Consumers need to be encouraged to think more about the environmental consequences of where and how their food is produced. The public need to be provided with information to enable them to make responsible choices. &#xa0;&#xa0;3.1 Food is a global, not national, market. Demand for food is rising rapidly.  By 2050, the world will need to feed 9 billion people on about the same land area as we use today, using limited fertiliser, water and pesticides and in the context of a rapidly-changing climate.&#xa0;3.2  The CLA believes the prime factors that influence global markets and food prices are:&#xa0;3.3 By concentrating production in a few large countries, the risk of a significant disruption to the world’s food supplies increases. If, as forecast, Brazilian chicken exports were to account for 89.7% of the global volume by 2018, the consequences if a problem were to occur with their production could be substantial.&#xa0;3.4 Land-rich countries and regions, such as Brazil and Africa, have great potential to boost global food supplies, but neither their ability to realise this potential, nor a well-functioning global market, can be taken for granted. We also have to deal globally with limited water; not just depleting aquifers, but also droughts that, due to climate change, are expected to strike with increasing intensity in the agricultural heartlands of continents the UK imports food from. &#xa0;3.5 While a healthy domestic agriculture is an essential component of a secure food system in the UK, a balance is needed.  Total self-sufficiency would make the UK’s food supplies less secure rather than more secure.  If the UK refocused solely on domestic production and ignored external trade, there could be an unforeseen catastrophic event, such as a major crop failure or disease epidemic in livestock, which would leave the UK needing to rapidly source food from global markets. Diversity of supply is the key to resilience.&#xa0;3.6 Trading relationships themselves are a source of risk. In 2006, 26 countries, including the UK, accounted for 90% of the UK’s food supplies, up from 22 countries in 1996.  In 2009, 34 countries each supplied the UK with at least 0.5% of its food imports. The Netherlands accounted for the highest share with 13%. According to Defra, the vast majority of our food (69% in value) comes from trading partners in the EU. But, there is no guarantee that even our EU trading relationships will always remain stable. In the event of severe shortages of basic food stuffs, it is questionable whether intra-EU trade would continue to operate smoothly.  While this may seem unlikely, there might be a need to consider contingency plans for dealing with the breakdown of the single market.  If EU countries did attempt to take protectionist action in a time of severe food shortages, the Commission would seek to ensure that the rules of the single market were upheld. But it may not be able to apply sanctions with sufficient speed.&#xa0;&#xa0;4.1 It is very difficult to make an accurate forecast of what value GM technology could bring to the UK food sector. This is because the current regulatory framework is so restrictive that the possibility for companies to develop GM products is very limited. As a result, UK food producers do not currently engage with the potential of such technologies, as it is not commercially viable.&#xa0;4.2 GM techniques, used as part of a wider approach to food security, can make a significant positive impact to food production in the UK. This is not just in how we can produce more from existing resources; it also concerns how we can protect biodiversity, improve natural resource provision, and make contributions to animal welfare. It is therefore vital that food security, however it is defined, takes into account the indirect challenges that come with needing to produce more. In our view, the livestock and woodland sectors have arguably more to gain from such GM technologies, and subsequently more to contribute in food security policy.&#xa0;4.3 The net global economic benefits at farm level added by cultivating GM crops, rather than conventional varieties of crops, have been estimated at $14billion in 2010, and by 2011, almost 17 million farmers around the world planted GM crops, up from 15 million in 2010.&#xa0;4.4 It is estimated that without GM, additional plantings of 5.1 million hectares of soybeans, 5.6 million hectares of corn, and three million hectares of cotton and 350,000 hectares of rape seed would have been globally required in 2010 to maintain existing output.&#xa0;4.5 In 2013, supported by national governments and UNESCO, the International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-biotech Applications (ISAAA) calculated the effects of GM crops on the environment. It concluded that GM crops alone saved the equivalent of 473 million kilograms of pesticides in 2011, saved 109 million hectares of new land being ploughed up and reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 23 billion kilograms of carbon dioxide equivalent.&#xa0;4.6 The growth of yields worldwide has stagnated for many major conventional food crops, as research published in Dec 2012 in the journal Nature Communications showed. If yield growth does not get back on track, the UK is going to have trouble keeping up with population growth and resulting food demand, and prices will rise, as well as more land being converted from nature to agriculture. Development of higher yielding and improved drought and pest resistant non-GM plant varieties would help, as well as selection of positive genetic traits in the livestock sector.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;5.1 It would be difficult to legislate or undertake policy intervention in this area without potentially compromising the market. Previous Government policy has sought to make the UK food chain more market orientated, e.g. with its strict decoupling policy approach under direct payments. &#xa0;5.2 Some sectors have been able to build better resilience as a result – larger arable sectors have benefitted from area based payments, whilst livestock producers have suffered – simply because of the average size of their holdings. In a market of varying input costs and market returns, it has remained one of the key constant sources of regular income for farmers. &#xa0;5.3 Intensive sectors, such as pigs and poultry have been forced to become hugely resilient, as they receive no effective support payments.  However, this has come at a price – coupled with high welfare standards imposed by the Government, the number of intensive producers have reduced notably as sizes of pig holdings have increased. Such economies of scale are becoming more common in agriculture (especially the livestock sector) in response to market forces and Government policy. &#xa0;5.4 Depending on the product in question, supply chains vary. Fresh produce will tend to have shorter chains, whilst component products will have longer and potentially more complicated supply chains. &#xa0;5.5 Where there are longer supply chains, the ease of providing clear traceability and labelling to the consumer is potentially jeopardised. This was made clear with beef products that contained traces of both horse meat and pig meat, in early 2013. To gain consumer confidence, these supply chains need to show greater transparency, arguably through labelling. However, where this inevitable cost is placed remains contentious. It should rest with the retailers at point of sale to the consumer, and not be passed onto the food producer. &#xa0;5.6 We can be confident that robust traceability for some sectors is quite easy; however, for others it will be expensive and arguably administratively complex, and may add further costs to businesses, potentially compromising resilience. &#xa0;5.7 The CLA supports fully the need for traceability systems that ensure the safety of food products. We believe that the emergence and success of the farm assurance schemes in the different agricultural sectors have gone some way in ensuring that food is safe, and produced to a high quality. &#xa0;&#xa0;6.1 In the UK, the Climate Change Act has been the trigger to obtain better information about climate impacts and risks in a format that allows businesses to plan. The Climate Change Risk Assessment process for different sectors, including Agriculture and Forestry, will be updated every five years, and so offers the opportunity to continually refine and update.&#xa0;6.2 There are some key risks for agriculture that require different levels of resilience building, as well as adaptation, depending on the farming system, and their current &#xa0;ability to make changes. The risks are drought, flooding, disease and pests. The changes that can be initiated are not just limited to financial or business related, but might also be geographical location, topography, soil type.&#xa0;6.3 Agricultural producers that rely on irrigated water will need to plan ahead to ensure that they have enough water during times of less availability. This will mean planning their water use efficiently, as well as investment in infrastructure, such as on farm reservoirs to improve their resilience. The growing of more drought resistant crops will also help reduce risks to water stress.&#xa0;6.4 Flooding events will become more frequent and will require a range of responses, from improved drainage to embracing more natural solutions, like flood alleviation. But importantly,&#xa0;it will need improved forecasting to allow local decisions to be made. Changes to cropping systems and land use will need to be carefully made to fit changing local conditions.&#xa0;6.5 Renewables have a role to play in managing UK food security and supporting British farming.  They can help reduce costs of production whilst providing environmental benefits. These benefits include:&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;7.1 The CLA is concerned by the levels of regulation in agriculture. Many find that the administrative burdens do not make food production worthwhile. This is why many mixed farm holdings are dropping certain aspects of their business and focussing only on the most profitable aspect.  &#xa0;7.2 Even for small producers who are seeking to set up a specialist business outright, the amount of regulation and red tape is very high. The key issue is that producers will have to deal with a multiplicity of agencies and bodies who often duplicate areas of competence, and very rarely share information with one another. An example would be small livestock producers who wish to slaughter and sell products from their holding. The number of relevant bodies who they would have to deal with would include the FSA, Defra, Valuation Offices, Trading Standards, Local Authorities, AHVLA, the Environment Agency and Natural England. &#xa0;7.3 The red tape involved is stifling businesses; it is often only larger businesses that have the resources to undertaken the compliance and administration. The Government needs to fully implement the McDonald Review. &#xa0;7.4 That said agriculture, as a sector, has to be more innovative.  Increasing attention has to be paid to the development of niche products. It is generally accepted that value added production is a main route to new markets and this development has to continue.&#xa0;&#xa0;8.1 The UK is, on average, 62% self sufficient in food products. This level represents a fall of some 13% since 1991 and reflects the globalisation of the food market. &#xa0;8.2 Agricultural produce, such as milk and dairy products, given the climatic advantages the UK enjoys for grass growth, would suggest a greater focus should be afforded. However, expansion of the sector has been curtailed through the quota system, and the latest milk deliveries figures suggest that production is significantly under quota. With milk quotas being removed in 2015, there is a real concern that the sector no longer has the capacity to expand as it might, in order to exploit commercial opportunities, both in the UK, EU and in other global markets.&#xa0;8.3 The CLA believes there has to be recognition that production is necessarily geared to price. If food security is to actually mean something, it has to recognise that farmers have to receive a fair return for their labours. Unfortunately, the current situation means that there is no equitable balance in the supply chain.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[December 2013]]]&#xa0; Future Farming: CLA Policy on Biotechnology 2013