&#xa0;

[[[Letter to Anne McIntosh MP, Chair of the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee, from the Prime Minister]]]I am writing following our exchange at the Liaison Committee on 10 September.During the course of the session, you said that 90 per cent of your constituency will not get fast-speed broadband for the foreseeable future. Having looked into the matter further, I believe the picture is much more positive than you portrayed.It is not surprising that rural areas have not been cost-effective for the private sector to provide superfast broadband coverage, and that is why the Government is supporting local broadband projects with £530 million of investment. My understanding is that three of the approximately 37 exchanges that serve your constituency are providing a commercially-funded superfast service (Thirsk, Malton and Filey) and a further one (Topcliffe) may already have been upgraded as part of the North Yorkshire broadband project.The large majority of the rest of the exchanges are planned for upgrade as part of the North Yorkshire project. Further information on exchange upgrades is available at www.openreachfibrebroadband.co.uk (though not all premises will benefit from exchange upgrades) while more local detail is available through the North Yorkshire maps at www.superfastnorthyorkshire.com. The Superfast North Yorkshire project is now well into delivery and has already provided superfast coverage to over 50,000 premises out of a total target of around 149,000. Roll-out of the current project is scheduled to be completed by September 2014.I am also pleased to say that DCMS has allocated a further £3 million of funding to the North Yorkshire project, to be matched against a further £5 million from Local Authority funding and the European Regional Development Fund. This will enable superfast coverage in North Yorkshire to go above 90 per cent of premises.However, some of the areas that you are concerned about within your constituency are among the most remote rural parts of the country. The Government recognises the need to extend coverage further and in the Spending Round in June, we announced a further £250 million of funding to extend superfast coverage to 95 per cent of premises by 2017, with local match funding, and we are engaging with the industry on how to reach 99 per cent of premises by 2018. As part of this, the Government is seeking to encourage interest from a wider range of suppliers. I am pleased to say that the North Yorkshire team is already engaging with DCMS on these proposals and I understand Ministers are confident that coverage in North Yorkshire will go significantly further than the current plans.Finally, you also referred during the session to the National Audit Office’s (NAO) report on the delivery of the rural broadband programme. While we would have welcomed greater competition, it is important to recognise that the NAO concluded that the approach we have put in place has reduced cost and has transferred risk to the private sector. The NAO also said that the mechanisms in the contracts with the supplier to manage costs during implementation appear to be robust. You might like to compare this approach with the project initiated by the previous government in South Yorkshire, which has been an object lesson in how not to deliver broadband projects even though it appeared to generate more competition.4 October 2013&#xa0;