

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;Written evidence from South Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive (LTD0022)&#xa0;This consultation response has been prepared on behalf of Sheffield City Region (SCR) Executive and South Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive (SYPTE). The response reflects the evolving governance in SCR towards a Combined Authority and the wider context of the Strategic Economic Plan (SEP), which Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) areas are currently preparing for Government.

[[[* What is the rationale for the Government’s proposals to devolve to a local level decision-making on transport expenditure? ]]]

[[[What are the advantages and disadvantages of the Government’s approach? Are there better models?]]]The rationale for devolution is about putting decision making closer to the people affected.  England has become one of the most centralised countries in Europe, therefore increasing the disconnect between Whitehall and ‘the people’.  Whitehall faces the significant challenge of understanding why investment in transport, or any other type of infrastructure, is needed. This need is best understood by those who are directly accountable to the people where the investment is needed.This new approach allows City Regions to make long term, strategic plans on major infrastructure and avoid the stop-go delivery of national projects.  In SCR, the BRT North scheme incurred an 8 month delay and resulted in additional funding being sought as a consequence of additional processes introduced by Government. The addition of the development pool and the Best and Final Bidding Process increased the level of uncertainty for the Project, which could have been avoided through greater local controls. ,  Devolvement of decisions on transport expenditure is only the start of the journey. Areas like the Sheffield City Region (SCR) are strengthening governance arrangements and establishing an accountable body to deal with strategic transport and economic regeneration decision making. In the SCR this is in the form of a Combined Authority. The wider remit of these bodies and the role of the private sector, are critical to ensuring that investment decisions solve the economic problem, not just transport problem. At present the Combined Authority is lacking two important features, which if available, would further enhance the delivery of this wider remit of strategic economic regeneration. Currently, the Combined Authority is unable to claim VAT and can only levy for transport funding.  It is vital that Combined Authorities can raise funds to spend on investment across a range of activities including transport, and that the statute that underpins the Combined Authority, enables this function.

[[[* Do local bodies (i]]]

[[[ncluding Local Authorities, Local Enterprise Partnerships, Passenger Transport Executives, Integrated Transport Authorities and Local Transport Boards) have the capacity to assess, prioritise and deliver local transport schemes? What would the optimum deli]]]

[[[very body look like?]]]The move from central decision making to local decision making brings with it cost and resource implications. Local bodies have the capacity to assess, prioritise and deliver local transport schemes, the challenge is resourcing this.  The cost will be borne by local partners and it is expected to be funded collectively, through funding available at the SCR Region level (rather than local contributions). Like most City Regions, SCR will choose to ‘top-slice’ their fund but we want to keep this to a minimum, in order to retain focus upon scheme delivery.  As with any shift of this type, Local Authority partners will need to work through what is best for their area. Alongside the need to allocate resource is the need to reduce costs, so it will be important for LTB’s/LEP’s to work with other areas to find ways of sharing resources and working more closely together.  SCR are working across the City Region to appraise schemes against a set of shared criteria and working with other LEP areas to share technical processes.  This open approach to working practices maintains efficiency through the pooling of resources.To support this new approach, the SCR LTB has agreed an Assurance Framework.  This was created to support our decision making and outlines the tools which will be used within this framework. This framework can be applied to all types of infrastructure projects, which is in keeping with the aspirations of the Local Growth Fund and facilitates cross-silo working.  It is expected that the delivery body for decision making will be a combination of a central officer team, supported by a panel of consultancy experts. Delivery of the investment will not change in SCR as scheme promoters, (typically Local Authorities), will remain the delivery body. Promoters will need to demonstrate to local decision makers in their business case, that they have the capacity to deliver, to justify the investment. By separating the investment decisions from the delivery, maintains a clear distinction between decision makers and promoters.

[[[* What is the best way of dealing with major transport schemes that cross Local Authority bound]]]

[[[aries or have wider regional impact?]]]For investment that has a regional impact, it will be critical that the promoter works with the Local Authorities and Combined Authority(ies), to demonstrate how the investment supports the priorities of the places where investment is planned. It is felt that the LEPs are able to deal with major transport schemes that cross boundaries and more mature working relationships will be able to overcome differences, to ensure high Value for Money scheme delivery.  As LEP’s and Combined Authorities become more established in their role to shape regional investment, it is expected that LEP’s will work more collaboratively on regional projects.  A good example of this in practice is the Rail North Strategy which emerged from cross boundary working between Sheffield, Manchester and Leeds City Regions.  The partnership was formed to influence rail devolution in the north and demonstrates joint working in practice, between LEPs. Similarly, South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire have worked collaboratively on the introduction of Smartcard schemes and joint healthcare services, therefore collaborative working is not the issue for us.   Cross boundary scheme negotiation has two elements; firstly, the appropriate governance in place to make decisions across the geography where the investment is proposed.  Secondly, it is important to have evidence to support decision making. The SCR Combined Authority provides the Accountable Body to make these decisions and the SCR land use and transport model (FLUTE model), enables schemes to be assessed on a consistent basis, regardless of whether they cross Local Authority boundaries.  As SCR have the tools in place and the working relationships with partners to facilitate cross boundary scheme delivery, greater financial autonomy would enable the delivery of more schemes at a local level.    

[[[* How effectively do local bodies work with each other and with Government departments and national transport agencies?]]]For this question there good and bad examples of how various organisations work together.  As described above, the Rail North partnership is a good example of how local bodies have come together with national transport agencies and Government, to establish a proposition to shape future franchising of regional rail services in the north.There is more work to do to further align the priorities of local bodies with external agencies, that have the potential to make significant differences to local areas. Currently the approach to consultation is a one way process.   Local Authorities are currently providing input to National Infrastructure Strategies but at the moment, it is unclear how our comments have been reflected.   Our preferred model of consultation would be where local priorities are clearly set out within national plans, with a mix of local and agency delivery.It is essential that Government departments continue to work with LEP’s.  This collaboration is enabling local partners to focus decision making on local priorities that meet national objectives. In some areas the relationships are well established, for example with the Homes and Communities Agency, Department for Transport and Department for Communities and Local Government. SCR see these relationships as a positive outcome of the move towards localism and will seek to strengthen the working relationships through the Strategic Economic Plan.

[[[* Do the current funding streams for major local transport schemes meet the needs of Local Authorities? How do current funding streams compare with previous arrangements? ]]]The current funding streams are insufficient and do not meet the needs of Local Authorities. SCR are seeking to correct this by securing major infrastructure funding that allows the area to invest in the transformational infrastructure that can grow the economy.  Transport and connectivity are a vital part of the mix of infrastructure investment required and we continue to encourage Government to devolve more funding on this basis.Pteg has prepared a separate response in which they identify the significant gap between investment in PTE areas and London. We support the points made in their response which outline the impact of the gap in infrastructure funding, outside of London. SCR see the SEP as the mechanism to rebalance the investment in major schemes.

[[[* What impact will the devolution in 2015 of funding to Local Transport Bodies and the introd]]]

[[[uction of the Single Local Growth Fund have?]]]For SCR, devolution has been a positive process, enabling Local Authorities to better prioritise work  across the geography. Devolution has enabled the establishment of a Combined Authority to progress at pace, alongside the creation of an ambitious infrastructure investment programme.SCR took the decision at the start of our journey to think about a wider programme of investment, beyond transport. The devolution of funding from Government will enable faster and better prioritisation of schemes and allow local accountability, using local knowledge to select how and where schemes should be delivered for maximum impact.  We expect to see this type of approach adopted more widely in other areas, for example our neighbours (West Yorkshire and D2N2) are looking at how to move their transport fund to a wider investment fund, as we have already done.The role of the LTB will change in the context of the Strategic Economic Plan and the wider investment decisions that Combined Authorities will make. SCR partners have always seen the LTB as part of a wider function of the CA and we are not surprised that the governance we are seeking to establish, matches Government’s ambitions to provide funding for a range of activities through a single source. As a result of the CA and Local Growth Fund, the LTB will be subsumed within a wider decision making body, so that decisions on strategic investment are taken by a single body.

[[[* How can Local Authorities attract greater investment f]]]

[[[rom the private sector for the delivery and maintenance of local transport infrastructure? What scope is there for the use of alternative funding streams?]]]To attract greater investment it is critical to have a clear and well evidenced proposition that provides a return, which the private sector is interested in. The work SCR have undertaken to create the SCR Investment Fund (SCRIF) is focussed on having a clear proposition from which negotiations can begin. Underpinning the proposition is the need for longer-term certainty over available funds as a baseline for wider ambitions. SCR have been successful in securing a 10 year allocation through the City Deal process for devolved Major Scheme Transport Funding to provide that baseline, but this is only the beginning.The ambition for SCRIF is to provide a ‘fund of funds’ to deliver long-term programmes of investment.  The funding will work on two levels. Firstly at the programme level by combining a range of funds allocated to the City Region, the Combined Authority will have the ability to deliver transformational schemes on a scale that individual authorities may find more challenging. Secondly, at a scheme level by demonstrating local commitment to a scheme, promoters will be in a stronger position to secure contributions or to accelerate delivery, as the level of certainty over the longer term is increased. This negotiation will help to reduce the call on the programme level funding, enabling more schemes to be delivered.In the case of public transport investment, it is unlikely that these types of intervention give a return on investment, so will therefore be unattractive to the private sector.  The capital investment made is likely to continue to be supported by the public sector but the on-going use of these assets will need to have commercial buy in from the private sector.  To make the best use of investment and to support the private sector, SCR are exploring other flexibilities (e.g. TIF), to capture the local value added and offset this against scheme costs. For transport, the need to express the proposition is especially important in the context of ensuring that external agencies, including the Government, deliver investment that complements local priorities.  SCR will be expressing through the Strategic Economic Plan, the work that has been undertaken to demonstrate the investment needed to provide the right transport offer to businesses, for example for connectivity to HS2 stations.

[[[* How clear are the lines of accountability for local decision m]]]

[[[aking on transport expenditure?]]]The lines of accountability within the Sheffield City Region are very clear.  The Combined Authority has been established as the accountable body, which has a clear structure in place.  The Combined Authority has membership from elected members and operates under the guidance of an Assurance Framework, which has been agreed by all member Authorities.       The Assurance Framework sets out how decisions are taken and who is responsible at each stage.  Local Authority partners form part of the decision making structure and as they are also the scheme promoters, this creates a lean decision making structure. December 2013&#xa0; Tony Travers; The Guardian, July 2013 [http://www.theguardian.com/local-government-network/2013/jul/10/tony-travers-devolution-local-government]