&#xa0;                                                                       

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[AbleChildAfrica]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]1.1.&#xa0;&#xa0; AbleChildAfrica is a UK based charity working with and alongside partner organisations in Africa to achieve equal rights for disabled children and young people. &#xa0;We are the leading UK charity working exclusively with and for disabled children in Africa. Our partners work on the ground to challenge and address the barriers faced by disabled people.1.2.&#xa0;&#xa0; Adopting a rights-based approach, we recognise that a person is disabled by the attitudinal, institutional and environmental barriers they face within society and therefore addressing these barriers is a means to achieving equality. Through our work, we highlight and address the additional and specific barriers that disabled children and their families face. 1.3.&#xa0;&#xa0; We are an active member of the UK network Bond’s Disability and Development Group (DDG), UNICEF’s Global Partnership on Children with Disabilities and the International Disability and Development Consortium (IDDC); AbleChildAfrica also upholds the fundamental principle of “nothing about us without us”.1.4.&#xa0;&#xa0; AbleChildAfrica welcomes this timely inquiry by the IDSC into disability and development, which we see as an invaluable opportunity to build on and enhance the role of the UK government in promoting inclusive development. There is now widespread agreement that the MDGs and development priorities will fail unless they are met for all people and that disabled people must be included.  There is also recognition that an individual’s impairment interacts with other factors to influence development outcomes and that disability should be as a core development topic within an inequalities framework. 1.5.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; In our work, we continue to see inequalities and barriers experienced by disabled children and their families; this evidence submission is intended to highlight some of these issues, with a particular focus on our area of expertise, children and families. &#xa0;2.1.&#xa0;&#xa0; DFID’s current policy commitments on disability and development2.1.1. AbleChildAfrica commends the positive work being done by DFID through its twin-track approach to disability. It is a leader in promoting the rights and inclusion of disabled people in development and putting the issue of disability on the global agenda. Its ‘Disability, Poverty and Development’ issues paper, guidance note and other disability practice papers comprehensively detail what needs to be done to ensure that disability is no longer side lined.  2.1.2.  While this high level support is evident, there is still a noticeable gap between the sentiments of the papers and what is actually being practiced on the ground. For instance, despite the 2007 practice paper on ‘Working on Disability in Country Programmes’, a 2011 report highlighted the significant absence of written statements in DFID country operational plans to reduce educational marginalisation for any vulnerable group other than girls. Unless these papers are elevated to policies and implementation monitored, we fear there will be little change in practices, particularly with regard to mainstreaming.2.1.3.  We recommend that a policy that draws together and builds on these existing documents and DFID’s twin-track approach is developed, implemented, and resourced with a realistic and practical monitoring and accountability framework.&#xa0;2.2.&#xa0;&#xa0; Disability mainstreaming within DFID’s sector programmes2.2.1.  DFID’s recognition that the MDGs cannot be achieved without addressing disability is an important statement that highlights the necessity of disability mainstreaming. As an effective tool for bridging the equity gap, we hope to see DFID continue and strengthen its efforts to incorporate disability mainstreaming practices across its sector programmes.2.2.2.  Currently there is still room for improvement to be made by DFID, particularly within core sectors - such as health and education - that impact the lives of disabled people. For example, although over 20% of the UK aid budget for this financial year has been allocated to health, we continue to observe many difficulties faced by disabled children and their families in accessing and receiving health services, at disproportionate levels to others. In fact, a recent study by Plan International found that disabled children are significantly more likely to have had a serious illness, including malnutrition than their non-disabled peers. In the areas where we work, this pattern was observed most strongly for children with intellectual impairments. 2.2.3.  Within the education sector, DFID has supported developing countries’ work towards achieving the MDG of universal primary education (UPE), unfortunately research demonstrates this progress has actually increased disparities faced by disabled children. Politically reverberant pressure to meet MDG/UPE deadlines has contributed to increasingly overcrowded classes, insufficiently trained teachers and declining quality; efforts to meet UPE then may ironically be hindering the conditions necessary for the inclusion of disabled children, without whom the goal cannot ultimately to be realised. We endorse the comprehensive 2010 DFID practice paper ‘Education for Children with Disabilities – Improving access and quality’. Yet as with the health sector, there is still much to be done on transforming this guidance notes into institutionalised practices and approaches. 2.2.3.1.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Almost ¾ of out of school children are in sub-Saharan Africa and disabled children are disproportionately represented in this group.  In fact, up to 98% of disabled children in developing countries do not attend school (UNICEF). The World Report on Disability reaffirms the finding that disabled children are less likely to attend school and demonstrates the adverse impact this has on human capital formation, employment, future earnings and productivity in adulthood.  2.2.3.2.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Evidence shows that whilst 63% of African children finish primary school, only 2% of disabled children reach this stage. In Tanzania where we work, being disabled doubles the probability that a child will never attend school.  Making effective use of DFID’s practice paper on education, could result in a significant positive shift in these figures.2.2.4.  To help enhance its mainstreaming efforts, we also recommend that DFID utilises disability-disaggregated data and indicators. Guidance should also be available on how to plan for and gather accurate data. AbleChildAfrica is aware that many disabled children lack access to protection, medical, psychosocial and legal services (UNICEF, 2005) so it is particularly important to ensure that data surrounding these issues are disaggregated within UK aid grants and country programmes.&#xa0;2.3.&#xa0;&#xa0; DFID’s approach to rehabilitation and service provision for disabled people2.3.1.  DFID’s practice papers rightly identify and emphasise that both mainstream and disability specific services should be holistic in their delivery. We call on DFID to ensure that both tracks are addressed simultaneously in a coordinated way. Furthermore, early interventions can reduce the likelihood of intersecting issues compounding upon one another.  Our partners often tell us that poor access to health care, habilitation and rehabilitation services impacts on the accessibility of education and skills training for disabled children and young people. 2.3.2.  As a signatory of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the UK government supports the right to the provision of learning materials, sign language and other assistive technologies. We would therefore call upon DFID to ensure that assistive aids that support a disabled child’s development and functionality are considered an essential service provision across all projects. While doing so, it is important to avoid stockpiling of unwanted or unsuitable devices, so there should be flexibility in the procurement requirements for such items to ensure that actual individual needs on the ground are being met. 2.3.3.  Of particular concern to AbleChildAfrica, are the unmet needs of children with learning disabilities or intellectual impairments and those with complex impairments, as well as their families. Entrenched stigma and social isolation unfortunately mean that actual prevalence will remain underreported until data collection and reporting are improved, however we know from our partners that the ability of families to access quality, or any, services remains a challenge. We believe there is an opportunity for DFID to be a leader in addressing this gap and setting the model for good practice using its rights-based approach. 2.3.4.  Finally, we recommend that the indicators used to measure success in the fields of rehabilitation and service provision go beyond tangible outputs and short term results to measure the real impact on individual lives. For example, a child who receives a wheelchair may not necessarily be able to access their local school or other community facilities and therefore continues to face barriers to inclusion. Such data should be captured across mainstream as well as disability-specific programmes.

[[[&#xa0;]]]2.4.&#xa0;&#xa0; Strength of the evidence base on ‘what works’ in development programmes involving disability2.4.1.  The DFID funded Disability Knowledge and Research programme has provided an invaluable bank of knowledge and information in relation to disability and development. filling the data gap on disability should still remain a priority for DFID to guide the level and types of interventions being made in its programmes. 2.4.2.  AbleChildAfrica believes it is important not to assume the criteria for what makes strategies effective; the evidence needs to be fed back from the ground and reflect the views of disabled children, youth and adults. We would also like to highlight that disability inclusive best practices will vary from country to country and therefore cannot be applied generically.2.4.3.  Our experience has shown that there is often hesitancy around applying inclusive practices in mainstream programmes, from government and civil society alike. This is largely due to misassumptions that it is too costly or complicated a process and can only be done with specialists available at all times. We have found that inclusive programming tools and Disability Equality Training are effective ways of supporting inclusive development.&#xa0;2.5.&#xa0;&#xa0; Role of disabled people in DFID’s policy and programmes2.5.1.  In recent years we have seen positive steps taken by DFID to ensure that disabled people have a bigger role and more voice within its work. Of particular note is the collaboration with disabled person’s organisations (DPOs) to undertake accessibility audits of DFID offices as well as steps taken to receive direct feedback from project beneficiaries. However, there is little evidence of DFID directly listening to the voices of disabled children or their families and we call upon DFID to extend their consultative practice to this group as well.2.5.2.  AbleChildAfrica is however, concerned that disabled people, particularly children, still remain mainly recipients of aid rather than leaders and implementers of the process. It is our belief that disabled people of all ages must play a central role in all stages of policy and programme development as well as implementation. Within Africa there are cultural constraints on the role of a child and their visibility is less pronounced. Combined with the added marginalisation of being disabled, it is important to safeguard the voices and opinions of disabled children in addition to promoting their access to services, social participation, inclusive play and protection. For empowerment and advocacy outcomes in particular, which can be harder to measure, we strongly recommend engaging with disabled children and youth, as well as their families, to determine what they consider to be indicators of success within such programmes. 2.5.3. Disabled girls in particular are known to face more barriers than boys, especially in societies that favour males to females. This makes them less likely to obtain health care, get an education, receive vocational training or find employment. On top of this, women and girls with disabilities are more likely to experience practices which qualify as torture or inhuman or degrading treatment and are more susceptible to violence and abuse. The multiple discrimination and additional marginalisation disabled girls face results in poorer access to services and silenced voices within the development auditorium.&#xa0;2.6.&#xa0;&#xa0; Financial costs and benefits of an increased emphasis on disability2.6.1. DFID’s Disability, Poverty and Development paper states that disability is a cause and consequence of poverty. Empowerment of disabled people to break out of the chronic poverty cycle requires directed efforts to ensure their access to services and inclusion in the society; giving consideration to disability issues and investing accordingly directly contributes to reducing poverty.  We recommend DFID adopt a policy of introducing an accessibility budget line into all programme funds in support of this goal. “Poverty reduction cannot be met without considering the needs of disabled people.” 2.6.2. We welcome DFID’s recent announcement to only support the construction of accessible schools and hope to see a comprehensive approach of inclusive design applied. It will be important that guidelines on accessibility, as well as training on these guidelines, are rolled out. We would like to encourage DFID to continue in this vein with all infrastructure project,s especially since the World Bank estimates that accessibility costs are generally less than 1% of total construction costs. 2.6.3.  Investing in early childhood development is also an important way of not only engaging with the issue of inclusion, but also increasing the chances of detecting and preventing health issues that can lead to lifelong impairments. Being excluded from early childhood education significantly reduces the opportunities that disabled children can have later in life in terms of securing working and financial stability. Research demonstrates that an individual’s potential income can increase by as much as 10% with each additional year of schooling, and this figure is likely to be even greater for disabled people, whose baseline earnings are undoubtedly significantly lower. Furthermore this increased independency will reduce the financial responsibility that is often placed on family members and government funds. &#xa0;2.7.&#xa0;&#xa0; UK’s work with other development agencies and partner governments on disability2.7.1.  AbleChildAfrica considers the UK Government to be a world leader in promoting disability inclusion within the international development sector. There is still much to be done and it is our hope that more resources will be invested to support the work being championed by DFID and UK parliamentarians. 2.7.2. Currently donor funds for disability projects tend to be project-based rather than supporting national disability strategies or CBR programmes. As a consequence there can be a significant separation across various initiatives, with no common standard of good practice, thus hindering sustainability. Supporting interventions at the strategic level would also be an opportunity to strengthen the ties between government and civil society organisations and promote disability mainstreaming.2.7.3.  To facilitate affirmative action we recommend that DFID ring fences funds - in line with its twin tack approach - for initiatives that particularly target disabled people, with a proportion set aside for the needs of children, as well as setting aside sufficient resources to ensure disability is mainstreamed across all DFID funding mechanisms.2.7.4.  We call on DFID to require all grant applications, government funding and country programmes to outline how funds will impact upon disability (as is currently the case for gender). Where possible all projects should actively include disabled people and at a minimum it should be a requirement that projects don’t inadvertently exclude or increase barriers for disabled people particularly children.2.7.5. Through its bilateral programmes, we would like to see DFID working with government partners to facilitate disabled people’s participation in the formulation and implementation of inclusive Poverty Reduction Strategy Plans. This would increase their democratic ownership, which in turn would help intended outcomes be realised. 2.8.&#xa0;&#xa0; UK’s role in ensuring disability inclusive post-2015 development goals2.8.1.  AbleChildAfrica commends DFID for this timely enquiry; the UK Government itself has recognised momentum is building and that the post-2015 development agenda has the potential to be watershed moment in history for disability and development.  The recent High Level Panel and Secretary General’s reports on post-2015 call for a transformative shift which ‘leaves no one behind’, they highlight the importance of disaggregating indicators to support this, and state that ‘no target should be considered met unless met for all social groups, including people with disabilities’. AbleChildAfrica echoes these sentiments.2.8.2.  However, this framework has not yet been agreed, and we call upon the UK Government to ensure that disability inclusion and an inequality framework remains central and explicit.  We encourage the UK Government to use continue using its position as a global leader and to work alongside civil society to maintain vigilance and pressure in the final moments. &#xa0;3.1.&#xa0;&#xa0; DFID should continue to build upon its solid foundations employing both its rights-based and twin-track approaches. Following its successful growth in disability-focused work, attention should now be given to strengthening disability mainstreaming across all DFID’s sector programmes.3.2.&#xa0;&#xa0; A policy for inclusive development should be created, drawing together into one concise document all the good work developed by DFID in the past and developing a robust implementation plan as well as monitoring and accountability framework that includes tools and indicators of inclusion. To ensure wider engagement and ownership it should be developed through a participatory approach - inclusive of children - and should include benchmarks of good practice in inclusion (e.g. the central role of disabled people in policy and programmes). 3.3.&#xa0;&#xa0; A series of ‘quick win’ policies that address factors for exclusion should be introduced into DFID’s operations and practices. These could include utilising positive discrimination quotas for disabled people, particularly children and females; committing to ensuring that all UK aid infrastructure projects are accessible; introducing an accessibility budget line into project templates and ensuring all new projects must highlight how they will impact upon disabled people in the conceptualisation phase.3.4.&#xa0;&#xa0; While disability is a cross-cutting issue, there are particular issues, such as abuse, violence, access to basic rights and social exclusion that disproportionately affect disabled children which need to be identified and addressed. In addition to this, childhood disability systemically impacts upon the whole family. 3.5.&#xa0;&#xa0; We strongly recommend that all actions are guided by the goal of assuring the full and meaningful participation for disabled people, of all ages. Moreover, ensuring a holistic approach to disability in development involves recognising that disabled people are not a homogenous group and have varying needs depending upon their age, gender, impairment, context and environment.3.6.&#xa0;&#xa0; AbleChildAfrica is happy to expand upon or support DFID with any of the above calls to action and is available to lend our unique expertise on the multifaceted considerations impacting upon disabled children and their families in Africa.December 2013&#xa0; We recognise the complexities and ongoing debate surrounding terminology regarding disability. However, as an organisation in the UK we have chosen to support and advance the UK Disability movement and their stated preference of using the terms ‘disabled person’ or ‘disabled child’ in recognition of the social model’s primary tenet that an individual is disabled by societal barriers.   Equity and Inclusion for All in Education, Global Campaign for Education (2011)  http://devtracker.dfid.gov.uk/sector/ Include us! - A study of disability among Plan International's sponsored children, Plan International (2013) UN MDG Report (2010) World Report on Disability, WHO and World Bank (2011) Education for All Global Monitoring Report, UNESCO (2008) UN MDG Report (2010) Children and Young People with Disabilities Fact Sheet, UNICEF (2013) Thematic study on the issue of violence against women and girls and disability, UNOHCHR (2012) European Commission (2004) Education for All: The Cost of Accessibility, World Bank (2005) Building Human Capacities in Least Developed Countries to Promote Poverty Eradication and Sustainable Development,      UNESCO ( 2011) Lynne Featherstone, Parliamentary Secretary of State for International Development, to the High-Level Meeting on Disability and Development