&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;1.1              Kent County Council (KCC), as the Local Transport Authority (LTA) for Kent, and as part of the South East Local Enterprise Partnership (SELEP) and Local Transport Body (SELTB) which also consists of Medway, East Sussex, Essex, Southend and Thurrock, welcomes the opportunity to submit written evidence to this inquiry on local decision making on transport expenditure. KCC would be very happy to expand on any aspect either in writing or as oral evidence.   &#xa0;1.2                KCC’s submission of evidence can be summarised as follows:&#xa0;&#xa0;1.3              KCC recommends to the committee that action is taken by the Government to: &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;2.1              The rationale for the Government’s proposals to devolve to a local level decision making on transport expenditure is to empower local communities and partnerships (local authorities and businesses) to identify and deliver transport schemes to meet their own local priorities, in line with the Government’s ‘localism’ agenda. In principle, this is a sound rationale, to devolve decision making on transport expenditure to where there is expert knowledge of local transport problems and appropriate solutions. However, in practice it is unlikely that the new arrangements will deliver this intended outcome.  &#xa0;2.2              In practice, decision making on transport schemes is still highly centralised. Local Transport Bodies (LTBs) “primary role is to decide which investments should be prioritised, to review and approve individual business cases for those investments, and to ensure effective delivery of the programme”. However, the implementation of an assurance framework, approved by the Department for Transport (DfT), under the rationale of “ensuring that LTBs are fit for purpose and have the necessary arrangements in place to ensure value for money and sound decision making”, in practice results in the DfT having a decisive say on what schemes are funded. Therefore local decision making is inhibited as we still need to meet the criteria set by the DfT in evaluating transport schemes. These criteria do not fully reflect the Government’s top priority of delivering growth as they still use factors such as vehicle operating costs and journey time savings. Such factors are often not relevant for the schemes we need to deliver to unlock growth.&#xa0;2.3              The DfT encourages scheme promoters to model and appraise transport schemes by following a 'proportionate' approach. The principle of proportionality is associated with the size of a transport scheme and the type and significance of benefits the scheme would deliver. However, the DfT has not yet made it clear in WebTAG (Transport Analysis Guidance) how to apply the principle of proportionality in preparing business cases. The lack of this guidance coupled with the requirement to comply with strict WebTAG rules, does not enable scheme promoters to take advantage of the devolved local decision making process.&#xa0;2.4              The requirement for schemes to have a fully developed business case and to be WebTAG compliant is of little difference from the former Regional Funding Allocation (RFA) system when the DfT directly approved individual local major scheme bids. A scheme may address local needs but if it does not satisfy the DfT’s appraisal process it will not be funded. Therefore this does not give local autonomy on transport scheme expenditure, but rather maintains central Government control over which projects proceed. &#xa0;2.5              The complex governance arrangements for the devolution of transport funding are also a major reason why the new system of local decision making on transport expenditure is not effective in practice. The formation of LTBs in addition to Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs) has added a further layer of bureaucracy and the relationship between the two bodies is very ambiguous. In the South East, it is not clear whether the South East LTB (SELTB) has the right to make its own decisions on the prioritisation of transport schemes, or whether decisions also need to be ratified by the South East LEP (SELEP). In practice, the SELEP has final sign off, therefore questioning the purpose of the LTB. Also, this is in an area where the LTB has identical geography to the LEP, something which is not necessarily the case with all LTBs and LEPs across England.&#xa0;2.6              The relationship between the LEP and its constituent local authorities is also challenging in terms of agreeing consensus on the prioritisation of transport schemes given that each local authority answers to its own electorate. The LEP (and also the LTB), as their own entities, are not accountable to an electorate. The involvement of the business community, although sound in principle in terms of identifying the types of transport schemes that will best support business needs and encourage economic growth, also raises questions regarding accountability of the business LEP members and to what extent they do reflect the views of the wider business community. &#xa0;2.7              A better model would be to devolve local decision making on transport expenditure direct to a ‘federated’ LEP consisting of smaller partnership groupings of Local Transport Authorities (LTAs) which have the experience of delivering transport schemes and are political bodies accountable to their own electorate. In the SELEP, Kent County Council and Medway Council (unitary) is an ideal partnership within a ‘federated’ LEP along with the other SELEP authorities forming their own federated areas, each able to make autonomous decisions on transport expenditure under the overall ‘umbrella’ of devolved funding to the South East LEP.       &#xa0;3.1              Local Transport Authorities (LTAs) do have the capacity to deliver local transport schemes as demonstrated by the delivery of projects under the previous funding arrangements, i.e. once local major scheme funding had been secured from central Government. The most recent example from Kent was the completion of the East Kent Access (EKA) road, an £87m scheme delivered by Kent County Council on time and to budget. LTAs also have the capacity to assess and prioritise local transport schemes as demonstrated by the work that is being done by local authorities for the prioritisation and assessment of transport schemes being funded through Local Transport Body (LTB) devolved funding; and the prioritisation work currently underway for the new single Local Growth Fund (LGF) devolved to Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs) post 2015.  &#xa0;3.2              The LTB and the LEP, as bodies in their own right, do not have the capacity to assess, prioritise or deliver local transport schemes. The LTB and the LEP do not have the staff resources to complete such detailed and technical tasks and ultimately the work comes back to the local authorities that make up the LTB and the LEP. This is at a time when local authority resources are under intense budgetary pressure. Alternatively, additional project costs are incurred through outsourcing work to external consultants. The private sector organisations involved with the LEP also do not have the capacity or expertise to complete transport scheme appraisal and prioritisation. &#xa0;3.3              The problem with the LTB and LEP taking forward such a process is that it adds another layer of evaluation, as once the LTA has prioritised its schemes these then need to go forward to a LTB/LEP prioritisation process. The experience of Kent County Council of this to date is that processes are often unclear and inconsistent and ultimately it adds time and money, especially to the consultancy sector who are commissioned to act as independent evaluators. Given the size of the funding pot being put forward for the single LGF, it is likely that considerable time and money will need to be allocated for the LEP wide process. Neither will assist the case for delivering the schemes we need to unlock growth quickly and could be avoided completely if there is the flexibility to award funding to federated LEP areas consisting of smaller partnerships of LTAs.              3.4              The optimum delivery body is the LTA working within a ‘federated’ LEP model. Funding should be allocated to these federated LEP areas with their LTAs assessing, prioritising and delivering their own schemes rather than the current two-tiered process of LTBs and LEPs trying to agree their priorities once the LTA has already completed this work for its own area. Reaching agreement on priorities is extremely difficult given the different political and business interests that make up the LTBs and LEPs. Each LTA, as an individual political organisation, needs to be able to assess and prioritise its own transport schemes, the delivery of which will always fall to the LTA of the county or unitary authority that the scheme is within. Schemes that cross local authority boundaries will require collaboration and partnership working between the authorities affected; and this happens through direct interaction between LTAs.          &#xa0;              4.1              The level of funding for local major transport schemes allocated to the South East Local Transport Body (SELTB) for the period of four years from 2015/16 to 2018/19 is £65.9 million or just under £16.5 million per annum. This level of funding is wholly inadequate for an LTB/Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) area consisting of two large counties in Kent and Essex, plus East Sussex and the urban unitary authorities of Medway, Thurrock and Southend. The funding also does not cover the full costs of the schemes being proposed, as a ‘local’ contribution is also required from local authorities, business partners or developer contributions.  Nor does it begin to meet the needs identified if aspirations around housing provision and jobs growth are to be realised.&#xa0;4.2              Allocating this limited amount of funding between the authorities, each with their own transport priorities, has proved an arduous task, required a considerable amount of staff resource, as well as consultancy support. The result is that Kent County Council has provisional funding for just two of the twelve prioritised schemes that it put forward. The unitary authorities within the South East LTB/LEP will not receive funding for any of their proposed transport schemes.  Overall, it could be questioned whether the considerable effort put into this process was worthwhile, particularly for the authorities that secured no funding.  &#xa0;4.3              As previously stated, the principle of devolving decision making on transport expenditure to a local level is sound and one which is supported by local authorities, therefore returning to the previous system of bidding to central Government for funds through the Regional Funding Allocation (RFA) is not being advocated. However, there needs to be a more effective system and Kent County Council is of the view that this can be achieved through a ‘federated’ LEP model. &#xa0;&#xa0;5.1              In 2015, local major transport scheme funding will be devolved to Local Transport Bodies (LTBs) with the allocations for the four years up to 2019 already decided, e.g. the South East LTB is allocated £65.9 million. Parallel to this in 2015, will be the introduction of the single Local Growth Fund (LGF) with devolved funding for not only transport but also skills and housing. The transport element of this fund is also not just restricted to local major transport schemes as with LTB funding, but also includes all transport funding, e.g. Integrated Transport Block (ITB), i.e. schemes under £5million, Local Sustainable Transport Fund (LSTF) and structural maintenance funding. &#xa0;5.2              The LGF is allocated to Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs) not LTBs, which brings into the question the role of the LTB. With local major transport scheme devolved funding, the LTB is in theory the decision making body and has an assurance framework with the DfT (although in practice, as previously stated in regards to the South East, the role of the LTB in relation to the LEP is unclear). With the LGF devolved to LEPs, this makes the role of the LTB even more unclear, unless the LTB serves solely as an advisory board to the LEP on transport decisions given that the LEP has to make decisions on all devolved funding and not just transport. The South East is fortunate in that LEP and LTB geographies are identical, however in many parts of the country this is not the case and the role of the LTB, with single pot funding through the LGF devolved to the LEP, is even more uncertain. &#xa0;5.3              Post 2015, a situation will therefore exist where there are two parallel devolved funding streams: local major transport scheme funding administered by the LTB; and funding for all transport expenditure, along with funding for skills and housing, from a single LGF pot administered by the LEP. The Government’s preference for the local devolution of funding to a single LGF pot, of which transport is just part of it, negates the need for an LTB and therefore these bodies should be disbanded with responsibility for overseeing LTB funding and project delivery passed to the LEP.&#xa0;5.4              The level of funding allocated through the LGF for the period 2015-21, will be on the strength of the LEP’s Strategic Economic Plan (SEP), which will specify the transport infrastructure required to support a committed level of growth in homes and jobs. Therefore transport schemes need to demonstrate that homes and/or jobs are dependent on the scheme in order for it to have a chance of securing funding. Economic growth is of utmost importance; however, there are also transport schemes that are needed for other reasons, e.g. safety, congestion relief and environmental benefits. These schemes may not directly support the delivery of new homes and jobs, therefore stand less chance of being delivered through the LGF and this substantially reduces the mix of transport improvements that are required to address a range of problems, not just the need for new employment and housing. Schemes that address safety, congestion and environmental problems will in many cases indirectly support growth in homes and jobs even if not necessarily directly, therefore they should still be considered for funding through the LGF.        &#xa0;5.5              A LEP wide SEP is currently being developed for the South East.  Given the vast geography of this area and what will be required to reflect the differing needs across it, a more efficient and effective system would be for a ‘federated’ LEP model with each federated area better reflecting local economic geography. Kent County Council would prefer to operate in partnership with Medway Council (unitary) in a ‘federated’ South East LEP with its own SEP and powers to administer its own LGF allocation.    &#xa0;&#xa0;6.1              The lines of accountability for local decision making on transport expenditure in terms of the South East Local Enterprise Partnership (SELEP) and Transport Body (SELTB) are not clear. As previously described, the role of the LTB in relation to the LEP is unclear and both the LTB and the LEP are not accountable to an electorate, rather each local authority within the LTB and LEP is accountable to its own electorate. There is no public accountability governing the business element of the LEP.&#xa0;6.2              There needs to be clear lines of accountability when it comes to decision making on all expenditure. Local authorities are able to do this with the transparent decision making processes that they implement with the Cabinet system which includes Cabinet Committees, Cabinet Member, Leader of the Council and full Council decisions. Councils are ultimately accountable to the public they serve and through the democratic process the public can vote for new representation within the electoral cycle if they are not satisfied with the decisions being made on their behalf.&#xa0;6.3              However, with the current proposals for devolved local decision making on transport expenditure being implemented post 2015, there is a clear lack of accountability in both the LEP and the LTB. Given the difficulty of agreeing consensus on transport priorities within the LTB and LEP, with each local authority seeking to promote schemes that benefit their individual areas, the method of how overall decisions are made and the accountability of that decision making process is brought into question. LEP business representatives also have a say in the decision making process yet they are not democratically accountable.&#xa0;6.4              Decisions taken on transport expenditure by the LTB and the LEP do not have clear lines of accountability and as such devolved funding should be given direct to federated LEP areas. This will allow local authorities have more direct control over transport expenditure and can take decisions through a clear and transparent process; and are ultimately accountable to the electorate.     &#xa0;&#xa0;7.1              Kent County Council recommends that in order to devolve decision making on transport expenditure to a local level, the need for schemes to follow the Department for Transport’s (DfT’s) WebTAG transport appraisal guidance and develop full business cases needs to be relaxed. A high level of staff resource is required for this level of detailed scheme assessment which puts local authorities under extreme pressure in the current climate of budgetary cuts. Furthermore, much of the WebTAG guidance does not make it clear how to reflect the current top priority policy of delivering growth in the transport scheme appraisal process. In order for there to be local decision making, this stipulation from central Government of WebTAG compliant schemes must be relaxed.&#xa0;7.2              Kent County Council recommends that the single pot Local Growth Fund (LGF) needs to allow transport schemes to be delivered that are not directly related to supporting the delivery of new homes and jobs. Although economic growth is the top priority, there are transport improvements that are needed for a variety of other reasons including safety, congestion and environmental benefits; and although they may not necessarily directly support new homes and jobs, in many cases these schemes will indirectly support growth. True local decision making would allow local authorities to make judgements on what schemes are funded based on local needs.&#xa0;7.3              Kent County Council recommends that the complex governance arrangement with the devolution of local major transport scheme funding administered through Local Transport Bodies (LTBs) is removed. Post 2015, there will be two parallel systems with local major transport scheme funding devolved to LTBs but with further transport funding available through the single LGF allocated to Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs). There needs to be one system, therefore the LTB should be disbanded in favour of the single LGF. &#xa0;7.4              Kent County Council recommends that the single LGF should have the flexibility of allocation to federated areas within LEPs consisting of smaller partnerships of local authorities. Within the South East LEP, Kent and Medway would form a federated area and administer their own devolved funding. This will allow decisions on transport expenditure to be taken through a more local and transparent decision making process that is accountable to each local authority’s own electorate. The delivery of local transport schemes will ultimately come down to the Local Transport Authority (LTA), and the processes of scheme assessment, prioritisation and delivery would be more efficient and effective within a ‘federated’ LEP model. LTAs are also capable of working with neighbouring authorities to deliver transport schemes that cross local authority boundaries.&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;1&#xa0; Local Frameworks for funding major transport schemes: Guidance for Local Transport Bodies, DfT, November 2011 Local Frameworks for funding major transport schemes: Guidance for Local Transport Bodies, DfT, November 2011&#xa0;