&#xa0;Written evidence from Transport for London (LTD0029)&#xa0;2.1              Transport for London (TfL) was established in 2000 and is the integrated body responsible for the Capital's transport system. Its main role is to implement the Mayor of London's Transport Strategy and to deliver and manage transport services across the Capital for which the Mayor has responsibility. These services include: London's buses, London Underground, Docklands Light Railway, London Overground, Tramlink, London River Services and Victoria Coach Station. We are the owner and operator of the largest integrated transport network in Europe.&#xa0;2.2              TfL is a statutory corporation regulated under local government finance rules. A functional body of the Greater London Authority (GLA), our responsibilities are set out in the Greater London Authority Act 1999 and we have several subsidiary companies incorporated under the Companies Act 2006.  &#xa0;2.3              The Department for Transport (DfT) is responsible for our funding settlement and the GLA acts as a conduit for grants from the DfT to us. On 1 April 2013, part of our general grant was replaced with retained business rates, under the Local Government Finance Act 2012 arrangements, payable by the GLA.  The Mayor approves our borrowing limit, in accordance with the Local Government Prudential Borrowing regime, and is responsible for setting the general level and structure of fares in London. 3.1              The biggest transport infrastructure project currently underway in London, and notably in Europe, is Crossrail. It is a good example of a scheme that is being delivered successfully in a multi-boundary and multi-stakeholder environment. The delivery of such a project is dependent on strong stakeholder support, integrated planning and formal funding agreements.&#xa0;3.2              Crossrail is a new railway for London and the South East of England which, when complete in 2019, will be 118km in length, connecting Maidenhead and Heathrow Airport in the West with Shenfield and Abbey Wood in the East. It will consist of 38 stations and is expected to cost £14.8bn to build. The Crossrail project is co-sponsored by us and the DfT and is funded from several sources, including Government grant, borrowing and other contributions, including contributions from businesses. Crossrail Ltd (CRL), a wholly owned subsidiary of TfL, is responsible for the delivery of the project. CRL has its own Board, consisting of a majority of independent non-executives, to supervise the delivery of the project on time and to budget. &#xa0;3.3              There was a strong business case for the project that demonstrated the need for a new cross-London route to alleviate capacity constraints, relieve overcrowding on existing Tube and train services and reduce journey times. Crossrail will also provide a £42bn boost to the economy, generate thousands of jobs and facilitate business activity along the Heathrow – the City – Canary Wharf corridor. The investment in the scheme will unlock growth and development that would not otherwise take place. &#xa0;3.4              The success of the project depended largely on a feasible long-term funding package being put in place. Funding was derived from three primary funding sources: the Government, fare payers and business, contributing roughly equal proportions. This is the first time major infrastructure has obtained a significant business contribution.  &#xa0;3.5              Crossrail has strong political support at both Mayoral and Governmental levels. There is also widespread public and business support, which meant that the introduction of new project-specific taxes, Business Rates Supplement (BRS) and Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL), was achievable. &#xa0;3.6              The taxation mechanisms, however, used to capture the contribution from businesses, cover the geographical area of Greater London only.  This means that businesses located outside the boundary, although benefiting from Crossrail, do not contribute towards its funding. Ideally, the construction cost should be borne by all who benefit from the project. This is easier to achieve in a suburban setting, where the extent of benefit across the transport route is easier to identify than on a project that crosses not only local authority, but also many regional boundaries, such as High Speed 2.&#xa0;3.7              It is also important to build links with the local communities that are affected by the transport construction works in order to obtain local support for the project. This may involve agreeing local priorities and infrastructure schemes that complement the main project, often from other funding streams. &#xa0;3.8              The project to extend the Northern line from Kennington to Battersea Power Station also demonstrates the importance of cooperation between national, regional and local government to deliver a robust financing and funding package. The package will include the GLA borrowing the initial financing requirement, and central Government and the London Boroughs of Wandsworth and Lambeth providing the development-related funding streams which will go towards repaying the upfront finance. &#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]4.1              Our perspective on the funding arrangements for major local transport schemes is likely to be quite different to most local authorities given TfL’s funding context. Our funding currently comes from three key sources:&#xa0;&#xa0;4.2              Major schemes, such as the Sub-Surface Railway Upgrade and other parts of the London Underground Investment Programme, are funded by a mix of fares revenue, Government grants and our prudential borrowing. A substantial revenue base provides an income stream to service debt obligations and hence makes debt-raising possible. Current funding arrangements fund both renewal and maintenance of existing transport provision and also, to some extent, investment in increasing transport capacity for the future. &#xa0;4.3              Our grants are set out in a funding settlement agreed during Spending Reviews. These settlements provide some long-term capital guidelines, which allow for sensible investment planning. These provide capital certainty for the first time and allow us to drive efficiencies through the Business Plan. While long-term profiles are extremely useful, change of Government and wider economic pressures and policies have led to changes to funding settlements in the past.  4.4              Since 1 April 2013, the Government has allowed local authorities to retain part of the non-domestic rates receipts locally. At the same time, certain grants, including our general transport grant, were cut. The new system gives local authorities more incentive to promote business growth in order to increase the business rates receipts payable. Although it is meant to provide greater fiscal independence, the system creates a more complicated relationship with the Government, which is still in control of the overall non-domestic rates policy and has the freedom to reset the system at any time. This makes it difficult for local authorities to plan for long-term transport investment that relies on retained business rates for funding and/or financing.&#xa0;4.5              In London, the growth in business rates is retained by the Mayor and allocated according to his priorities. Whilst there is a risk that business rates receipts will not grow at a rate that fully compensates for the reduction in central Government grants, there is also an opportunity to benefit from increases in business rates. Provided that the Government maintains stability in its retained business rates policy, the GLA, together with other local authorities, will have more control over its funding at a local level.  This is welcomed by us, as part of the GLA group.&#xa0;4.6              Whilst the current investment programme in our Business Plan is estimated to meet the growth in London’s transport needs in the short-term, delivery of additional major transport projects that would both increase network capacity and unlock growth potential of certain areas of London is difficult in a constrained funding environment. Government funding is limited and London’s taxation powers do not currently exceed the part-devolution of the business rates income. &#xa0;4.7              In the past, we have successfully used a number of alternative funding sources to raise funding for specific projects, Crossrail being an example. CIL, Section 106 developer agreements and direct developer contributions played an important, but to date not the deciding, role in ensuring that a viable funding package could be put together. These funding options represent a step change from previous arrangements and provide established mechanisms for generating revenues in the future where applicable.&#xa0;4.8              The Northern line extension is the first example of a major scheme that is planned to be funded entirely through third parties – property developers and business rates payers. However, in the event that development fails to occur and/or business rate receipts do not materialise as planned, it is the public sector that will be required to bear the funding risk. The need for the public sector to underwrite such third party funding mechanisms undoubtedly limits the appetite of local authorities to undertake major transport projects that do not rely on Government grants as a primary source of funding. &#xa0;4.9              We believe that, although some innovation in transport project funding has occurred, which is a move in the right direction, more can be done. What will help local authorities to seek alternative funding sources to fund major transport projects is greater devolution of taxation powers and/or a Government guarantee of project funding in certain scenarios. Finance can be raised without sustainable funding sources to repay the initial investment, however, this is of limited value. &#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]5.1              It is important to understand what is meant by private sector investment.  New third party funding from the private sector, for instance through business contributions or the business rates supplement, does permit higher investment.  The provision of finance from the private sector does not, unless it brings greater efficiency, or a better risk allocation, offset the higher cost of capital.&#xa0;5.2              Before we obtained borrowing powers in 2003 under the Local Government Act, the main form of attracting private sector investment into significant transport projects was the Private Finance Initiative (PFI). From 2000, we managed 13 PFIs (some of which we inherited from predecessor organisations), with a combined value of £18bn. Since 2003, we have had greater access to alternative funding sources, coupled with a significant revenue base, and therefore have greater flexibility to consider the wider financing options available. As a natural consequence of this, we have moved away from extensive use of PFIs, in part because the cost of both debt and equity finance from the private sector has increased substantially (particularly since the financial crisis), while the level of risk transfer remains constant.  Hence it is our view that additional financing premia do not offer value for money to the public sector as compared with alternative funding models.&#xa0;5.3              In 2012, the Government relaunched PFI as the Private Finance 2 (PF2) initiative, looking to address the imbalances of risks and rewards under the PFI contract model. However, we believe that the reforms did not go far enough to address the issues of financing premia currently being charged by the private sector and the level of innovation that a private sector PFI partner would be free to introduce for transport projects in London, given the constraints required to ensure London’s transport system remains integrated. &#xa0;5.4              For major projects, we develop a funding and financing package on a project-by-project basis, looking at the best mix of public and private investment. Some projects lend themselves more easily to private sector investment than others. Currently, there are different private funding and financing sources that we may draw upon: PFI, direct borrowing from capital markets, CIL, BRS, Section 106 agreements, Tax Increment Financing (TIF) and sponsorship. &#xa0;5.5              In order to attract private sector investment, a project must provide the private sector a return from its investment. For example, in the case of the Emirates Air Line, a substantial amount of sponsorship was secured for the project and, in exchange, certain commercial rights were passed to the sponsor. In the Crossrail project, both the developer and the general business community recognised the economic boost that the new transport link will generate, and were, therefore, more willing to contribute funds towards the scheme in the form of additional tax revenues and developer-specific contributions. In PFI projects, private financiers earn a predefined level of return for taking on specific project risks.&#xa0;5.6              In general, our experience is that there is significant investor appetite for infrastructure projects and, in particular, for transport schemes. Investors are looking for low risk long-term investment opportunities and infrastructure projects, especially transport, provide the right investment environment. This may not always be value for money, however, as compared with Government funding or our own borrowing, when risk transfer to the private sector is limited and scope for innovation is low. The private sector will still expect a reasonable return and security of its investment and will look for projects that can demonstrate both. This can be achieved only if the Government acts as a guarantor for the private sector investment return.&#xa0;5.7              There are limits to the extent to which private sector investment can be used effectively - not least because of the impact that such investment may have against our borrowing limits and more broadly, Public Sector Net Debt; but also if  private investment is generated over time, rather than upfront to finance a project’s construction. The organisation’s balance sheet constrains the amount of up-front finance that is available, even if funding can be secured over the long-term. &#xa0;5.8              A more radical examination of alternative funding streams was presented by the London Finance Commission in its May 2013 report, ‘Raising the Capital’.  The Commission put forward a case for fewer borrowing constraints and greater devolved tax powers for London, which would enable London Government to invest more comprehensively without the need for ad hoc, project-by-project financing arrangements. The Commission’s recommendation was to devolve both domestic and non-domestic taxes to London and pass the responsibility for setting the tax rates and authority over all matters including revaluation, banding and discounts to the regional level of Government. The report also recommended lifting the GLA’s borrowing constraints. Such a reform would increase the number of alternative funding streams available to London and could provide sources of both financing and funding infrastructure projects without the need for central Government funding and with more reliance on the private sector.  The City Centred campaign has brought together the Mayor, London Councils and the Core Cities (Birmingham, Bristol, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle, Nottingham, Sheffield) to jointly press for fiscal devolution to England’s cities, which would allow for increased power and freedom to fund local transport infrastructure projects.  Greater devolution to London and other major cities may be an avenue the Committee will want to explore.&#xa0;December 20136&#xa0; London Finance Commission, ‘Raising the Capital’, May 2013: http://www.london.gov.uk/priorities/business-economy/publications/raising-the-capital 