&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Dr. Rebecca Dingo, Associate Professor at the University of Missouri]]]

[[[, USA]]]

[[[.]]]Executive Summary:Introduction:[1] I am an Associate Professor with tenure in Women’s and Gender Studies at the University of Missouri, USA. I write as a scholar/researcher who has spent the last 10 years examining global gender and disability policy arguments and development programmatic plans developed by international organizations such as the United Nations and the World Bank, national governments, and NGOs.  I am trained in gender and development, transnational and international feminisms, and rhetorical methods. I also have experience working in the newly established international scholarly field of disability studies.  This training and my research has afforded me an important birds-eye view of various development program outcomes across the world; I make recommendations based on looking at outcome trends across these programs. My scholarship has addressed the relationship between language used in development policy and programs and their material outcomes.  [2] My response importantly takes seriously that the language we use to describe and promote development agendas, goals, and plans has a deep history and often conjures up specific ideological meanings beyond what an author/committee may (or may not) intend. For example, notions of “normalcy” and “disability” are not formed by objective fact but through discourse—or any spoken or written language in use as a social practice. Discourses draw from ideologies that are often unquestioned and presumed to be naturalized and commonsense. This means that when people use words such as “normalcy,” “disability, “mainstreaming,” and “inclusion” they draw upon commonplace social ideas that are deeply tied to longstanding social beliefs. As disability scholar, Jong-Gu Kang (2009) explains discourses of disability are power-laden constructs that privilege the able-bodied/mind majority and their ways of being. In short, disability is a social construct rather than a natural fact and steps need to be taken to analyze a communities’ normative interpretation of bodily difference (Foley, 2009) because disability is “implicit in cultural representation, in language and in socialization" (Shakespeare, 1994) and “our realities revolve around the culturally ascribed dominate meanings of differences and how they irrevocably impact lives” (Gallagher, 2001).[3] For this reason, I also take seriously that notions of what is a disability and what is not a disability tends to manifest in language as taken-for-granted objective fact. Widely held perceptions of disability have persisted (albeit such discourses subtly change throughout time) through social, political, cultural, and even economic and geopolitical interactions and arrangements. As a result, policies and programs may promote ways of thinking and ways of practicing that continue to misunderstand and misrepresent the needs of people with disabilities (PWD), stigmatize them, and ultimately disempower them. [4] Disability Studies scholars tend shun the medical model of disability that speaks of and treats disability as a pathology to cure or overcome (e.g. Garland-Thompson, 2005). This model tends to talk about individual “impairments,” “cures,” “deficiencies,” and “illness”, for example, over the socio-culturally negative attitudes and stigmas and the political, and physical systemic barriers that are the main contributing factors in disabling people. While mainstreaming and inclusion policies do not necessarily promote a medical model, they do emphasize that a PWD must fit into the mainstream instead of the mainstream changing to fit them. Disability studies also draws attention to the fact that PWD enhance our communities not only through their participation in public life, but also by demonstrating alternative means of being and doing that are often useful for the wider community (e.g. wheelchair ramps help people pushing children in strollers and people who have short-term leg or knee injuries and can prevent knee injuries; lights at corners that beep and have visual cues help all people cross the street more safely). &#xa0;[5] As a result, disability studies scholars and activists tend to embrace a social-cultural view of disability as just another part of the diversity of the human condition. They point out that many of us who are currently able bodied, will become disabled later as we age and then become dependent on our communities for care.  They also promote that the notion of  “disability” is, of and in itself, a cultural construct or interpretation that often varies across time, place, and situation.  This final point is crucial to my recommendations and comments on mainstreaming and inclusion programs because it draws attention to how current geopolitical arrangements impact how we understand and create disability and development programs and why they are often unsustainable for the development organizations and PWD.  &#xa0;Background &amp; Evidence: [6] Mainstreaming and inclusion may appear to be viable development strategies for alleviating poverty among PWD because they attempt to put PWD on equal footing and with equal treatment with people without disabilities.  Yet, research of several disability and development initiatives across the world suggest that programs promoting only mainstreaming and inclusion do not get at the heart of why PWD continue to comprise 20% (U.N. 2006) of those in poverty across the world. The background and evidence I offer does not come from on-the-ground calculated data as many policy briefs and analyses do. As my article, “Making the Unfit, Fit” makes clear, development practitioners must be careful of the language they use so that they do not continue to forward the very conditions that constrain PWD ability to participate in their communities and they must be mindful of the geopolitical contexts that impact PWD’s local circumstances.  For this reasons, I wish to highlight three problems I have with some mainstreaming and inclusion models:[7] These models can further produce stigma against PWD since the onus to enter the mainstream in these programs is often constructed as a choice to be made by a PWD who may already have constrained choices due to the aforementioned problems.  Crucially, as disability studies scholar Harlan Han (1997) makes clear, “the unemployment rate of disabled adults may be traced to broad economic forces rather than individual impairments” (p. 17). Han’s findings highlight the need to look beyond impairment and demonstrates the importance for development programs to recognize and promote understanding disability through the social model-- and even what I would describe as a contextual model-- by identifying and creating programs that confront systematic barriers (physical, social, cultural, economic, and geopolitical), negative attitudes, and social exclusion (purposefully or inadvertently) to public participation. [8] Moreover, the social model of disability suggests that attempts to fix or cure the disability without addressing how the wider community treats PWD can lead to further stigma and even social exclusion even while attempting to be inclusive. When PWD are constantly being told their bodies/minds and ways of being need to change to be included into the mainstream this can cause low self-esteem on the part of the PWD and continued stigmatization by people without disabilities. Such thinking also crucially ignores the social, geopolitical, and economic reasons that PWD are unable to participate fully in the mainstream (Meekosha, 2011).  [9] Mainstreaming and inclusion policies tend to focus on the individual with a disability being able be a part of a mainstream community instead of addressing the way that social and economic factors and practices are what actually makes a person disabled.  These social and economic factors vary across locale, region, and nation.  In contrast, the social/contextual model of disability sees that people can become disabled by a lack of resources to meet their needs.  These resources can be monetary but they can also include[10] In Karr’s (2011) comparative study of QOL indicators for PWD in three different countries with very different histories and geopolitical relationships (the US, Nepal, and Zambia) she found that generally across each country PWD indicated that access to communities/structures that allow PWD to practice self-determination and that value PWD ability to use their resources and knowledge capacity to pursue their interests ranked as the highest indicators for QOL.  [11] Yet, QOL can differ across culture and QOL can be affected by local circumstances.  In Western countries that value independence, QOL may include living in their own homes, in regions that value collectivity, QOL may mean participating in community decision making.  For this reason, I advocate for a slight revision of the social model of disability that I call the contextual model of disability.  [12] This contextual model follows both feminist approaches to political economy and transnational practices (Dingo 2012) and Meekosha’s (2011) study of indigeneity, disability, and colonialism in Australia. It also takes the following into account [13] Disability activist and scholar Helen Meekosha (2011) states, “Disability is produced in the violence and war that is provoked by the North, either directly or indirectly, [and] in the struggle over the control of minerals, oil and economic resources” (668). For example, in regions of Central Africa where precious metals are mined, for example, people have little choice in work and that work is often dangerous, poorly paid, and produces disabilities through work conditions, poverty, and violence.  In other words, simply speaking about mainstreaming and including PWD, does not get the wider contexts of poverty.  For this reason, Meekosha (2011) suggests paying attention to “social suffering in order to understand “disabling and distressing events that have occurred on large and communal scale” (p. 670) in poor nations. She advocates the development of frameworks and measurements for understanding and addressing the collective sufferings of the world’s poorest disabled peoples.[14] Lastly, in relationship to social and contextual models of disability, the practice and discourse of mainstreaming and inclusion have both material and linguistic constrains that directly impact PWD and can lead to short-sighted development programs over long-term sustainable development.  Post the 2004 Disability and Development conference hosted by the World Bank, disability activists began to have a formal presence on the World Bank’s Disability and Development website.  Since then there has been a notable recognition how stigma works on many levels ranging from language practices and their work on the psyche to actual funding opportunities for PWD.  For example, as noted in an article by Flavia Nakabuye Bwire, George Mukasa, and Roy Mersland (2009), notions of mainstreaming and inclusion cannot work if there is not work on the social and cultural stigmas against PWD.  In their study of a Ugandan microlending development initiative they show how despite the intentions of “mainstreaming” PWD into micro-lending programs, for example, prevailing ideologies about PWD kept lenders from reaching out to this population.  Likewise, if they did, lenders tended to make special programs for PWD and in doing so privileged microlending plans that were unsustainable for the person taking the loan once the loan period ended. Notably, they found that many banks and lending NGOs chose not to lend to PWD because they believed the following: &#xa0;&#xa0;[15] Along these same lines, because many microlending agencies rely upon solidarity groups or village banks, due to stigmatization, local community members also believed these same stigmas and discouraged agencies from reaching out to PWD.  As Bwire et als (2009), make clear in their findings, such stigmas not only limit important business opportunities for the wider community and the lending agency, they also “fail to practice the double bottom line policy of reaching both financial and social objectives, which nearly all micro-finance agencies claim” to be part of. A contextual model of disability takes into account how mainstreaming and inclusion programs must address wider contexts, such as addressing how a community talks about and makes presumptions about PWD within local contexts. The Uganda project was somewhat successful because the program relied on community members (some with disabilities) to actually train lenders how to interact with PWD. This program was unique because it worked against common practices of mainstreaming and inclusion of PWD and instead focused on the changing the mainstream to be more inclusive. Recommendations:[16] Since the World Bank’s 2004 Disability and Development conference, long-term studies examining disability and development initiatives out of specific countries such as Bangladesh, India, Uganda, Serbia, the US, Nepal, Australia, Zambia, and Cuba (to name a few) indicate that programs that merely employ mainstreaming and inclusion efforts often re-marginalize PWD.  Such programs promote mainstreaming work and education related activities that target the people with the disability.  Yet, these programs do not address:[17] These all impact the physical and mental environment of people with and without disabilities. Moreover, the sorts of mainstreaming and inclusion work activities available to people in poor nations can be dangerous and create more disabilities and/or are dangerous for PWD. Based on a birds-eye-view of disability and development programs this evidence submission has focused on shifting programs away from a sole focus on mainstreaming, inclusion, and rehabilitation of PWD and instead to emphasize the following: Disability and development programs should[18] Mainstreaming and inclusion initiatives tend to emphasize the need for people disabilities to change themselves so that they can participate equally with people who do not have disabilities. Such priorities place the onus for PWD to develop skills and habits on par with their non-disabled community members.  And in most cases, due to physical or psychological barriers, people with disability are (like many who are marginalized) are unable to participate in the mainstream on equal footing without significant changes to the environment and to ideologies and expectations about “normal” ways of being verses “abnormal” ways of being.  In some cases, programs that have only emphasized work or education related activities and microloans aimed to teach PWD how to participate in the formal labor sector, have resulted in further stigmatization.  Such plans in and of themselves are not wholly problematic but they miss the fact that the people without disabilities that people with whom PWD interact may hold deeply ingrained stigmas against those PWD. Simply providing formal work and educational opportunities to PWD makes it easy for NGOs, microlenders, and development practitioners to continue to marginalize (via their expectations and ignoring of contextual issues) PWD in these settings.  Likewise, stigma operates deep in the psyche and is often reinforced by language and ideology so that even development experts, NGO practitioners, and micolenders might presume that PWD have not cultivated important educational expertise, knowledge, abilities, or practices that might already make them employable, able to pay back loans, begin businesses, and participate in their communities.  Citations:Bwire, F.N. Mukasa, G., and Mersland, R. Access to Mainstream Microfinance Services for Persons with Disabilities — Lessons Learned from Uganda. Disability Studies Quarterly, 29 (1). Retrieved from http://dsq-sds.org/article/view/168/168.Dingo, R. A. (2012). Networking arguments: rhetoric, transnational feminism, and public policy writing. Pittsburgh, Pa.: University of Pittsburgh Press.Foley, D. (2009). The Contextual and Cultural Barriers to Equity and Full Inclusive Participation for People Labeled with Disabilities in Bangladesh. Disability Studies Quarterly, 29 (1). Retrieved from http://dsq-sds.org/article/view/170/170.Gallagher, D. (2001). Neutrality as a moral standpoint, conceptual confusion and the full inclusion debate. Disability and Society, 16, 637-654.Garland‐Thomson, R. (2005). Feminist Disability Studies. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 30(2), 1557-1587.Hahn, H. (1997). Advertising the Acceptably Employable Image: Disability and Capitalism. The Disability Studies Reader. New York: Routledge.Kang, G. (2009). A Teacher's Deconstruction of Disability: A Discourse Analysis. Disability Studies Quarterly, 29 (9). Retrieved from http://dsq-sds.org/article/view/173/173.Karr, V. L. (2011). A Life of Quality: Informing the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons With Disabilities. Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 22(2), 67-82.Meekosha, H. (2011). Decolonising Disability: Thinking And Acting Globally. Disability &amp; Society, 26(6), 667-682.Reindal, S. M. (1999). Independence, Dependence, Interdependence: Some Reflections On The Subject And Personal Autonomy. Disability &amp; Society, 14(3), 353-367.Shakespeare, T. (1994). Cultural representation of disabled people: Dustbins for disavowal? Disability and Society, 9(3), 283-299.&#xa0;&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0; This evidence submission benefitted from feedback from Jay Dolmage at the University of Waterloo in Canada, Rachel Riedner at George Washington University in the US, and Jennifer Wingard at the University of Houston in the US.  