&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from]]]

[[[ Rail North]]]

[[[ (LTD0034)]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;1.1              Rail North represents the 33 Local Transport Authorities working together to devolve responsibility for rail franchising from Whitehall to the North of England.  Devolution of decision-making for the railways in the North will lead to better economic and transport outcomes for the North. &#xa0;1.2              In September 2013 Rail North submitted a full proposition and business case to the Department for Transport setting out plans for the devolution of decision-making for the railways in the North.  The proposition was supported by every local transport authority in the North of England, Local Enterprise Partnerships, business groups and others.  &#xa0;1.3              In late November the Secretary of State confirmed his support for the principle of devolution with DfT taking a role within an initial partnership structure.  The Partnership will cover the re-franchised Northern and TransPennine services.  The parties intend to agree detailed arrangements to ensure that the franchises will be jointly designed and managed by the Partnership, with DfT running the procurement processes to a common timetable.  It is agreed that the Partnership should be structured to allow the balance of risk to change over time. &#xa0;1.4              A Joint Rail North/ DfT Officials Group will develop the detail of the Partnership proposals for presentation to the Secretary of State and the Rail North local authorities early in the new year.  We would expect to have made progress in this respect by the time the committee hears oral evidence.&#xa0;1.5              A map covering setting out the scope of the Rail North proposals is included at the end of this submission. &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;* What is the rationale for the Government’s proposals to devolve to a local level decision-making on transport expenditure? What are the advantages and disadvantages of the Government’s approach? Are there better models?&#xa0;2.1              The rationale for our proposals is that a devolved and locally accountable railway will focus more on the places of the North, their prosperity and passengers, than one where accountability is remote.  &#xa0;2.2              Our proposals for devolution of rail responsibilities stem from the DfT consultation in February 2012 around how rail decision-making might be decentralised in line with similar policy changes in local decision-making.  &#xa0;2.3              The North has taken the lead in many of areas of recent change in relation to devolved decision-making.  Over half of the first wave of the government’s “city deals” have been with Northern conurbations – the momentum of this programme is now being replicated in another five areas in the North.  The bigger cities of the North are reforming their own governance through the creation of combined authorities.  The cohesion that combined authorities, local transport boards and Local Enterprise Partnerships have created forms a firm foundation for our proposals relating to rail.  The advantages of rail devolution in Merseyside, Scotland, Wales and London demonstrated the success that has been gained by greater local involvement and investment in rail service outputs.  All of these examples have at their heart better alignment of local and regional spend across programmes relating to economic development, transport and regeneration and lead to stronger local economic outcomes.  &#xa0;2.4              A devolved railway is able to bring the advantage of actively considering the “place” dimension to rail planning in a way that national specification cannot.  Viewed from London the North is seen often as half a dozen major conurbations.  But the railway for the North needs to look beyond this to the smaller cities and towns that make up the conurbations, and to the diverse and widespread hinterland that includes both local centres and more isolated communities.  Both in the conurbations and in the hinterland there are areas that are prospering and areas that seek regeneration.  Transport and rail plays a key role in meeting the needs of both.  The devolved railway will focus on the places of the North, their prosperity and passengers.  The North is connected by common economic objectives.  Places across the North are becoming ever more interdependent.  Connections between places must become stronger.  There must be a higher degree of integration between planning for rail and the planning of both other forms of transport and economic development.  &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;* Do local bodies (including local authorities, local enterprise partnerships, passenger transport executives, integrated transport authorities and local transport boards) have the capacity to assess, prioritise and deliver local transport schemes? What would the optimum delivery body look like?&#xa0;* How clear are the lines of accountability for local decision making on transport expenditure?&#xa0;* What is the best way of dealing with major transport schemes that cross local authority boundaries or have wider regional impact?&#xa0;3.1              The Rail North proposals have had to develop a structure for accountability.  It has done this through working with every authority in the North, and their collective agreement to the proposed structures is a major landmark.  It is proposed that direction is set by a North of England Leaders’ Committee, and implemented through by a special purpose vehicle (SPV) with the working title Rail North Limited.  The plans, which may be modified in the light of the recent agreement with the Secretary of State (para 1.3), are for a governance structure that will work across all the authorities in the north of England.  The plans set out how the authorities of the North will work across boundaries, and make decisions together in a manner that balances democratic accountability, inclusivity, and focussed executive decision-making.  &#xa0;3.2              The plans will also align accountability with those who bear risk, whilst as set out above, also provide protections for all north of England interests.  The overall decision-making structures will be capable of taking financial responsibilities and have a substantial capacity to manage and bear risk.  Within the proposed structure larger authorities, or groupings of smaller authorities, have the choice of taking on franchise-wide risks. &#xa0;3.3              Many of the authorities in the North have significant expertise in developing and delivering significant and complex transport schemes, for example in procuring and developing tram systems, operating local heavy rail systems, in developing transport interchanges, and in managing commercial arrangements with transport operators.  These skills will be brought to bear in support of the Rail North proposition.   &#xa0;3.4              The foundation for prioritising investment and service development will be based on the Long Term Rail Strategy for the north of England.  This strategy covers both passenger and freight – and focussed on the next 20 years.  This strategy was published for public consultation in July 2013, following earlier discussion with LEPs, business groups, local authorities, passenger groups, and the rail industry.  The public consultation on this Strategy concluded in October and we intend to publish a final strategy in the early part of 2014.  This will create a framework for prioritising options in rail franchising, and in the development of future rail capital programmes in the North (e.g. around further electrification).  &#xa0;3.5              It is important also that rail franchises in the North are developed to take on board initiatives, both from the franchisee and local stakeholders, to improve railway outputs at a local and grass roots level.  The North is one of the strongest parts of the country for community rail and station adoption groups.  The new franchises must build on these concepts and facilitate new ways in which local communities can make an increasing input to their local railways, often in conjunction with other local initiatives, such as relating to town centre redevelopment, transport integration, community transport, or local social enterprises.  &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;* How effectively do local bodies work with each other and with Government departments and national transport agencies?&#xa0;4.1              Since the Rail North proposition was put to government in the early autumn the Secretary of State has confirmed his support for the principle of devolution, with DfT taking a role within an initial partnership structure to help manage the risks associated with a project of this scale.  The approach will be based on the proposals that have been developed by Rail North over the past year, and which include the Long Term Rail Strategy for the North of England (para 3.4), a wide ranging business case, and a structure for decision-making in the North (para 3.1).  Government and Rail North must now rise to the challenge and bring this in-principle support to practical and substantive effect in planning for the design and management of new franchises for the North.  &#xa0;4.2              A shared set of principles has been agreed to underpin this Partnership with DfT.  These acknowledge the importance of growing the railway to maximise the benefits of infrastructure investment and linking this to railway efficiencies, and having a platform for determining investment priorities within the Partnership.  The Secretary of State has welcomed the principle of risk and reward sharing between members of the Partnership.  Further work between Government and Rail North is needed to develop a Partnership that is structured to define the balance of risk, and set out how it will change over time.  &#xa0;4.3              A very good recent example of the North of England working well together comes from the joint work between Northern authorities to promote a common approach to making the case for the Northern Hub Network Rail infrastructure programme.  This work was led by the pan-Northern role taken by the “Northern Way” – a collaboration between the Regional Development Agencies.  The value that Northern Way brought, and which Rail North brings, is being able to take a greater than local perspective, and one that is supported by strong evidence.  The work on the Northern Hub was founded on (a) a common set of priorities that were developed across the North focussed on wider economic objectives, and (b) a united approach between local authorities, businesses, MPs and others from across the North.  The proposals for devolved decision-making in rail build on this successful precedent.  &#xa0;4.4              Finally national agencies and government often find it difficult to sustain a relationship with the North because of the perceived, and often practical, complexity of dealing with a large number of parties.  Rail North is able to act as an interlocutor between the North and national bodies.  This can help those national bodies be more effective and more responsive to the objectives and outcomes the North seeks from its transport systems.  This especially true in rail, where typical passenger journeys, and most freight movements, cross large areas of the North, and where significant collaboration is required with and between a large number of authorities, LEPs and other stakeholders.   &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;* Do the current funding streams for major local transport schemes meet the needs of local authorities? How do current funding streams compare with previous arrangements?&#xa0;* What impact will the devolution in 2015 of funding to Local Transport Bodies and the introduction of the Single Local Growth Fund have?&#xa0;* How can local authorities attract greater investment from the private sector for the delivery and maintenance of local transport infrastructure?  What scope is there for the use of alternative funding streams?&#xa0;5.1              At the heart of our case are three arguments around the better use of resources, and potential new sources of funding, that devolution will bring.  &#xa0;5.2              First, we expect that in a Partnership with DfT that evolves towards a devolved railway that responsibility for resource allocation and funding will transfer over time to the North.  Because of the challenge created by developing a growing railway that supports delivery of regional economic outcomes, the North will be very strongly incentivised to find ways of making the railway more efficient in delivering these outcomes.  This includes a greater management focus on performance, through a better understanding of what matters to passengers (and businesses) locally.  Over the past 15 years nationally-run franchising has delivered very little impact on industry efficiency in the North.  In part this is because nationally-inspired efficiencies were often developed in isolation from the local benefits that might be brought about through them.  The partnership work between DfT and the North must act to drive such efficiencies and recycle their benefits into a railway that promotes the economy of the North and provides a better railway.  &#xa0;5.3              Second, a stronger role for northern authorities in the railway will deliver better integration of (a) decision making, and (b) transport planning and networks.  Nationally-led franchising has tended to favour development of those services that have least impact on the direct transport budget.  Whilst this is a financially pragmatic short-term approach it means that some services which have a high economic impact can be neglected.  By integrating rail into wider transport networks and ‘places’ the North can make the railway a more coherent part of wider transport systems, and better for passengers.  &#xa0;5.4              Third, a railway with strong “local ownership” is more likely to be able to secure funds for further development.  The Rail North work on a Long Term Rail Strategy has already catalysed work on sub-regional priorities; this has been complementary to work by LEPs and Local Transport Boards in prioritising recently devolved funds at a sub-regional level (e.g. transport funds, city deals, local transport block funds and local growth funds). Together this work will ensure that business cases for greater investment in transport are better founded, and hence it is more likely that local funds will (a) be spent on better value transport interventions, and (b) be more confidently applied by local agencies.  Furthermore where such priorities coincide with the wider aims of the Long Term Rail Strategy there will be a stronger case to apply any surpluses Rail North Ltd may gain from any profit or revenue share arrangements it has in place with the train operator, thus multiplying the impact of scarce locally-derived funds.  &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;6&#xa0;