&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by the UK Energy Research Centre (LCI0022)]]]Prepared byProfessor Jim Watson, UKERC Research DirectorDr Rob Gross and Phil Heptonstall, Imperial CollegeDr Nick Eyre, University of OxfordDr Nazmiye Ozkhan, University of WestminsterDr Mark Winskel, University of Edinburgh

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[UK Energy Research Centre ]]]&#xa0;The UK Energy Research Centre carries out world-class research into sustainable future energy systems.&#xa0;&#xa0;It is the hub of UK energy research and the gateway between the UK and the international energy research communities. Our interdisciplinary, whole systems research informs UK policy development and research strategy.&#xa0;&#xa0;www.ukerc.ac.uk

[[[Introduction]]]This submission has been prepared by a group of researchers from the UK Energy Research Centre (UKERC). It draws on a number of current and recent UKERC research projects including research on carbon capture and storage (CCS), the assessment of electricity generation costs, scenarios for smart electricity grids, and energy efficiency and demand reduction. It also builds on the wider expertise of the authors in low carbon innovation, including the role of policies and incentives to support such innovation. To discuss our response further, please contact Professor Jim Watson, UKERC Research Director: Email jim.watson@ukerc.ac.uk; Tel. 0207 594 1571).Before turning to the Committee’s specific questions, it is useful to set out some important features of low carbon innovation that have informed our responses. The definition of innovation we use in this submission is a broad one. Innovation includes several distinctive but related stages – from research and development (R&amp;D) to prototyping, demonstration, commercialisation and deployment. Early conceptions of innovation characterised a linear process of moving through these stages from R&amp;D to deployment. However, this ‘linear model’ was soon abandoned as too simplistic by many of those engaged in innovation as well as some of those trying to understand and support it.More complex conceptions of innovation were developed for several reasons, each of which is important for current and future UK policies to bear in mind. First, there are frequent feedback loops between the stages of innovation. Innovation does not only happen through the development of new technologies, it also occurs as a result of ‘learning by doing’ as technologies are deployed in markets. Onshore wind and solar PV provide clear examples where innovation and learning through deployment has delivered substantial cost reductions. However, recent work by UKERC also suggests that cost reduction through innovation and learning is an inherently uncertain process that may not be characterised by smooth downward trajectories, and that exogenous factors such as currency movements and raw material price rises can overwhelm such cost reductions.Second, innovation involves multiple interactions between public and private sector actors in ‘innovation systems’. These systems have traditionally been understood at a national or regional level, but there is an increasing emphasis in innovation research on systems that focus on particular groups of technologies (e.g. low carbon technologies). Furthermore, these systems are increasingly global which poses particular challenges for national innovation policies. Third, innovation is not only a technological process – it is also associated with institutional and social changes. For example, smarter electricity networks could open up opportunities for electricity markets to operate in different ways, and for a different relationship between consumers and energy suppliers. Fourth, innovation can be incremental (e.g. to steadily improve the thermal efficiency of a gas turbine or solar panel) or radical (e.g. to fundamentally change the relationship between electricity supply and demand through the application of information, communication and control technologies).&#xa0;

[[[Responses to ]]]

[[[the Committee’s questions]]]The UK’s low carbon transition will require changes in our energy system at a speed that is unprecedented in our lifetimes. Analysis by the government, the Committee on Climate Change (CCC) and UKERC shows that these changes will require concerted action across the energy system to develop and deploy low carbon and energy efficient technologies. A recent review of low carbon scenarios generated by one of UKERC’s energy systems models reinforces the importance of energy efficiency across the economy if medium and long-term targets for emissions reduction are to be met in a cost effective way. It also shows that early decarbonisation of the electricity sector – and some subsequent electrification of other sectors (heat and transport) is common across these scenarios. This transition will also require broad societal acceptance of the large-scale low carbon generation technologies that may be needed to achieve these goals (e.g. wind, CCS, nuclear).  In some cases (e.g. home refurbishment, travel mode and community energy projects) more active engagement by citizens with the energy system, and in the changes that are required, is implied. These social and behavioural changes form part of the innovation that is necessary. UKERC funded research on public attitudes to energy system change indicates that it is possible for the public to make sensible judgements about energy system innovation when they understand the dilemmas and challenges involved.  Against this background, our view is that the government’s overall approach to low carbon innovation has moved in a positive direction over the last 10 years. As the National Audit Office (NAO) report commissioned for this inquiry shows, the UK government has significantly increased funding for energy research, development and demonstration (R,D&amp;D) since the early 2000s. The vast majority of this funding has been directed to low carbon technologies (see Figure 1).

[[[Figure 1: ]]]UK Public Spending on Energy R,D&amp;D (1974 to 2012) Source: IEA Energy Technology Research and Development Database.It is also welcome that government funding is not only focused on fundamental research, but is also concerned with the development, demonstration and early deployment (see our response to question 4 below). Furthermore, the NAO highlights positive improvements since 2010 in the co-ordination of publicly funded R,D&amp;D and in the development of an improved evidence base through Technology Innovation Needs Assessments (TINAs).However, the NAO report also draws attention to some shortcomings of the government’s approach. There is now a substantial international evidence base on ‘what works’ in energy innovation policy. Insights from this evidence base include: the need to establish a coherent, system-level perspective, providing sustained funding over time, avoiding ‘capture’ by incumbent private sector interests, and supporting a combination of incremental and potentially radical innovations.Judged against this evidence base, the UK approach could still improve. As shown by Figure 1, government funding for R,D&amp;D has been erratic. There has been a dramatic decline since the 2010 high point – with a one-third reduction in total public spend between 2010-11 and 2011-12 alone. This was due to a ‘spike’ in funding in 2010 due to the stimulus package the UK government implemented following the 2008 financial crisis.  Furthermore, there have been calls for the level of funding to be increased further to reflect the extent of the UK’s low carbon ambitions.There has also been a lack of systematic evaluation of past R,D&amp;D programmes, and the inclusion of explicit learning within the design or new or revised programmes. In some cases, such learning has been undertaken. For example, both DECC and the NAO have reflected on some of the problems encountered in attempts to fund full-scale CCS demonstrations. Whist progress with the demonstration of CCS technologies has been slow and frustrating – and this is in part due to the poor design of innovation policies - lessons learned have then been incorporated into the design of the current phase of the CCS commercialisation programme.The NAO also notes that co-ordination across public sector bodies and agencies with respect to low carbon innovation may not be effective enough. In our view, the Low Carbon Innovation Co-ordination Group (LCICG) has been successful to some extent in improving co-ordination and taking a ‘high level’ strategic view of priorities for low carbon innovation. However, co-ordination could be more effective at the level of individual initiatives or technology areas. For example, a number of initiatives are seeking to support smarter electricity and heat networks including the Energy Technologies Institute smart systems and heat programme, the Low Carbon Networks Fund (overseen by energy regulator, Ofgem) and a proposed new Energy Systems Catapult (funded by the government’s Technology Strategy Board). There is significant scope for a greater level of information sharing, and joint learning across these initiatives. 

[[[&#xa0;]]]Historically, many commentators argue that there has been a bias towards the support of low carbon innovation on the supply side of the energy system, both in the UK and more widely. This is reflected in a greater level of government support for innovation in energy supply technologies, despite well documented and well understood barriers to the development and widespread uptake of demand side innovations. It is therefore welcome that energy demand technologies have recently received a greater share of UK government R,D&amp;D funding than in the past (see Figure 1).Given the barriers to deployment of energy efficiency technologies, and their potential to deliver emissions and cost reductions relatively quickly, it is reasonable to place a major focus on the deployment phase of the innovation process for demand side options. Historically, that is what the UK and other Governments have done. However, the current policy approach to deployment needs to be strengthened. Our analysis indicates that the current policy mix is unlikely to deliver sufficient cost-effective energy efficiency. Contracts for difference will provide a clear signal for investment in low carbon supply; but there is no equivalent support for electricity efficiency deployment. Support for household electricity efficiency under CERT has not been continued in the Energy Company Obligation (ECO).  Support for business sector energy efficiency, outside the Climate Change Agreement (CCA) sectors, is effectively restricted to energy taxes (CCL and CRC), which will have a limited impact given the price inelasticity of electricity demand. The proposed £20M Energy Demand Reduction pilot provided for in the Energy Bill is welcome, but itself very small and its operation through the capacity market is a priori unlikely to be effective for energy efficiency technologies given their high capital cost and negative operational costs. It would be a mistake to focus only on the deployment of demand side technologies, or to assume that the rate of technical change on the demand side of the energy system is slower than on the supply side. The opposite can be true: mass-market technologies change more rapidly than those dependent on large scale construction projects.  For example, lighting technology could go through two complete transitions (from incandescent to fluorescent; and then from fluorescent to LEDs) in the time-scales it will have taken to deliver a single power plant fitted with CCS. Of course, there are difficulties supporting innovation in energy efficiency: it cuts across three major sectors – buildings, process industry and transport – with a huge diversity of actors and technologies.  However, well-designed Government funded R&amp;D programmes to support energy efficiency technologies have been found to be highly cost effective in both the UK and the USA.  Although network technologies are not necessarily low carbon per se, they can been important enablers of low carbon energy systems. Network innovations for heat, gas and electricity have also received more government support in recent years because of this enabling role. R,D&amp;D activities have been funded by government, the Research Councils, electricity distribution companies (via initiatives such as the Low Carbon Network Fund, LCNF) and the Energy Technologies Institute (ETI).The LCNF program is facilitating network innovation by enabling trialing of new technologies, operating and commercial arrangements. A recent review of smart grid projects across Europe reveals that the UK is now one of the largest investors in smart grid demonstration projects. However, in per capita terms, UK investment is well behind some other countries such as Denmark.Effective mechanisms have not yet been put in place to share learning between different funded programmes, and to improve the effectiveness of the innovation system in this area. Recently the Energy Networks Association launched a ‘smarter networks portal’, an inventory of projects overseen by Ofgem. This does not include projects funded by other public funding bodies. Successful deployment of network innovations will depend on the systematic application of the learning from these individual R,D&amp;D projects by network companies and other actors (e.g. Local Authorities) to their mainstream activities. In addition to good mechanisms for learning, this will also require sufficient skills and access to capital. The under supply of skills in science, engineering and technology occupations in the UK could negatively impact the pace and scope of network innovation in the coming decades. Similarly, there will need to be strong, long-term incentives for investors and network operators via regulatory formulae and other policies for if such wider deployment is to take place.

[[[&#xa0;]]]There are two main rationales for the role the LCICG plays. First, there is a need to improve the co-ordination of low carbon innovation funding across different public funding bodies. This should help to promote learning, to strengthen networks between firms and other innovating organisations, and to identify areas where there are synergies or overlaps. Second, strategic thinking is required to identify priority technology areas for these funding bodies.Whilst the establishment of the LCICG has improved co-ordination significantly, there is still scope for this to improve. Both the NAO report commissioned for this inquiry and the recent report from the Research Councils’ Energy Strategy Fellowship make this point. The Fellowship report also argues that there is scope for more co-ordination between funding agencies at a ‘working level’, for example through specific joint initiatives such as funding calls.  The LCICG also has a key role to play in identifying priority technologies and funding mechanisms for the UK’s publicly funded energy R,D&amp;D programmes. Given that the UK is a medium sized economy, and public finances are tight, it is not possible for public funding to support all low carbon technologies at a significant level. Despite this rationale for prioritising a number of specific technology areas for support, the UK government has not provided explicit rationales for the choices that have been made. A partial exception was the report produced by a group convened by former Chief Scientific Advisor, Sir David King, in 2002. &#xa0;The TINAs that have been produced so far, together with an assessment carried out by the Research Councils’ Energy Strategy Fellowship, represent a welcome step forward. These assessments focus on important criteria such as the relevance of specific technologies for UK policy goals, the potential value of successful development and deployment for the UK, and the current status of UK scientific and industrial capabilities. Of course, the TINAs have some limitations. The government has not yet published an overall strategy that draws on these individual TINAs – and provides a rationale for technological priorities. Such an overview is due to be published in early 2014. In addition, innovation may also entail changes in the behavior of energy users, business models and institutions. These non-technical dimensions of innovation need to be factored into innovation policies more strongly.The measurement of the relative success of the LCICG’s strategy – and of the government’s overall support for low carbon innovation – will not be straightforward. As the NAO notes, the LCICG has proposed seven metrics for outputs and outcomes. It remains to be seen how easy it will be to gather the necessary data – and to attribute such outputs and outcomes to R,D&amp;D programmes. Given that innovation often occurs over relatively long timescales, there are likely to be significant time lags between spending within these programmes and the full impacts of this spending on deployment. Furthermore, such metrics will only be useful if they are part of a wider effort to monitor and evaluate the impacts of R,D&amp;D programmes – and to apply the lessons to future programmes.&#xa0;It is important for government to strike a balance between support for nearer-to-market low carbon technologies that can be deployed over the next 1-2 decades and support for more basic R&amp;D for the long term. Technologies in the former category are much more likely to have an immediate impact in helping to meet energy policy goals, particularly the UK’s carbon budgets to the late 2020s. Some commentators have called for a refocusing of efforts on more fundamental R&amp;D on the grounds that ‘breakthroughs’ may make meeting these targets cheaper. Whilst such R&amp;D is important, our view is that this is very unlikely to be sufficient. A significant amount of innovation (and cost reductions) occurs through learning-by-deployment. For this reason, there needs to be a continuing policy support for the deployment of a range of low carbon innovations including energy efficiency and demand reduction (see answer to question 2 above) and low carbon supply. Furthermore, this policy support needs to be tailored to take account of the large differences between low carbon technologies in terms of their development stage, markets, level of complexity and so on. Taking offshore wind as an example, it is important to focus on operations and maintenance regimes to enhance reliability and improve load factors, and reductions in capital costs through increases in turbine size. It is therefore welcome that the government’s approach emphasises stages of the innovation process that are nearer to market – including the demonstration and scaling up of low carbon technologies. Demonstration is a particularly risky stage of the innovation process because it requires an increasing amount of investment to be made by a technology developer, but at a time when the risks of failure remain high. Government policy has an important role to play in supporting technologies across this ‘valley of death’ between R&amp;D and commercial deployment.The UK’s CCS commercialisation programme and the Low Carbon Networks Fund (LCNF) are two good examples of government funding for this stage of the innovation process. It is not clear in either case whether government funding will help deliver all of the desired outcomes. But they show that government and other public sector bodies (Ofgem in the case of the LCNF) have become more comfortable with demonstration funding. As we have noted in our answer to question 1, mechanisms for learning within these programmes will be essential. These will help to ensure effective knowledge sharing by the companies and other organisations involved, and lesson learning by funding bodies seeking to maximise the chances of successful outcomes. &#xa0;As we have noted in our answer to question 4, innovation processes take time. Therefore funding programmes that support these processes need to have a certain amount of predictability and durability. The UK’s recent experience of funding for energy R,D&amp;D has been a distinctive and rather extreme one, as shown by Figure 1. As the Energy Strategy Fellowship report argues, more sustained funding is required, with longer-term programmes in some cases.If the recent decline continues, and there is no improvement in certainty, there is likely to be a commensurate decline in investment in innovation by the private sector. The recent changes to the Energy Company Obligation (ECO) illustrate this. These changes have already had a substantial effect on delivery plans for solid wall investment.  This results from the scaling back from the original ECO plans, which our analysis at the time indicated was very ambitious (arguably over-ambitious).  However, the change is a serious setback for longer term building fabric efficiency goals in the UK, given the importance of the solid walled building stock, as it substantially weakens the policy drivers for improvement of this technology. One change in ECO from earlier supplier obligations is removal of support for improvements in efficiency in lighting and appliances. Again, this results in limited pressure for commercial investment in innovation.  Another contrasting area where short time horizons are potentially an issue is the CCS commercialization programme. As noted earlier, progress with the demonstration of CCS technologies in the UK has been frustratingly slow. Whilst it is very welcome that £1bn is still available in principle to partly support one or more demonstrations, repeated delays mean that there is a risk that this funding will not be available when required – especially if implementation is delayed beyond the current Spending Review period. 

[[[&#xa0;]]]Given that many low carbon technologies are developed by multinational firms, international collaboration can complement national government R,D&amp;D programmes – and help to reduce the costs of achieving domestic policy goals. The IEA noted that for the UK, ‘international collaboration… may be essential to accelerate technology development’. The European Union is the UK’s most important international arena for public energy innovation. As in the UK there have been recent efforts to improve the coherence of European research. Spending in the Framework Programme (and the successor ‘Horizon 2020’ programme) is embedded in the European Commission’s Strategic Energy Technology Plan, which elaborates a long-term vision of energy system development. This includes Industrial Initiatives and a European Energy Research Alliance (EERA), comprising 15 leading energy research institutes (UKERC is the lead partner in EERA for the UK). The International Energy Agency has also built up a significant range of publicly funded activities in energy innovation in recent years, including a set of Implementing Agreements (IAs) for collaboration in specific areas. Evidence on the effectiveness of UK engagement in international initiatives is mixed. The UK participates in 25 of the IEA’s Implementing Agreements. This is well above the average. Within the 7th European Framework Programme (FP7), UK universities and research organisations have out-performed the European average in attracting support. However, the reverse is true for private companies. The UK’s performance in attracting this funding for low carbon research within FP7 has also been mixed. According to a Committee on Climate Change report in 2010, UK funding share was just 11% at the time, far behind Germany which attracted 21%. The UK was also perceived at the time as being less effective as other states at influencing the design of the Framework Programme for low-carbon technologies. As more consolidated international programmes have emerged, the UK’s system of distributed centres and networks has created some barriers to participation. UK participation in international programmes has been mostly on a bottom-up basis, led by individual institutions with little overall co-ordination (see our response to Q3). The Energy Research Partnership identified a need for stronger linkages between the UK’s domestic energy innovation strategy and international engagement. The international review of the Research Councils’ Energy Programme also detected missed opportunities for international collaboration, due to lack of guidelines or incentives (particularly for collaboration outside of the European Union), lack of funding and low awareness or time availability on the part of researchers.December 2013

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;&#xa0; Watson, J (2008). Setting Priorities in Energy Innovation Policy: Lessons for the UK. ETIP Discussion Paper. Cambridge, MA: Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University. Gross, R. et al (2013) Presenting the Future: An assessment of future costs estimation methodologies in the electricity generation sector. Research Report. UK Energy Research Centre, London Ekins, P. et al (2013) The UK Energy System in 2050: Comparing Low-Carbon, Resilient Scenarios. Research Report. London: UK Energy Research Centre.  Parkhill, K., C. Demski, et al. (2013). Transforming the UK Energy System: Public Values, Attitudes and Acceptability. Synthesis Report London: UKERC. National Audit Office (2013) Public funding for innovation in low carbon technologies in the UK. Briefing for the House of Commons Energy and Climate Change Select Committee. London: NAO. e.g. Chiavari, J. and Tam, C. (2011). Good Practice Policy Framework for Energy Technology Research, Development and Demonstration (RD&amp;D). International Energy Agency, Paris; Grubler, A. et al (2012) ‘Policies for the Energy Technology Innovation System’ in: Global Energy Assessment: Toward a Sustainable Future. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.1665-1743 Skea, J. et al (2013) Investing in a brighter energy future:  Energy Research and Training Prospectus. London: Imperial College. NAO (2012) Carbon capture and storage: lessons from the competition for the first UK demonstration. London: NAO. Watson, J.  et al (2012). Carbon Capture and Storage, Realising the potential? Research Report. UK Energy Research Centre. London. Grubler, A. et al, op. cit. IEA (2012). World Energy Outlook 2012. Paris: OECD/International Energy Agency. Eyre, N. (2013). ‘Energy saving in energy market reform—The feed-in tariffs option’ Energy Policy 

[[[52]]](0): 190-198. Griffin, P., G. Hammond, et al. (2012) ‘Impact review of past UK public industrial energy efficiency RD&amp;D programmes’ Energy Conversion and Management 

[[[60]]](0): 243-250. NRC (2001) Energy Research at DOE: was it worth it? Washington DC, National Academies Press. Giordano, V. et al (2013) Smart Grid projects in Europe: Lessons learned and current developments, 2012 update, JRC Scientific and Policy Reports, European Commission RAE (2012) Jobs and growth: the importance of engineering skills to the UK economy Royal Academy of Engineering econometrics of engineering skills project, Final Report, September 2012 Skea, J. et al (2013) op. cit. Chief Scientific Adviser’s Energy Research Review Group (2002). Recommendations to inform the Performance and Innovation Unit energy policy review. London: Office of Science and Technology. See Table 6 in Skea, J. et al (2013) op. cit. Moselle, B. and Moore, S. (2011). Climate Change Policy: Time for Plan B. Policy Exchange, London. Gross et al, op. cit. R Gross et al (2012) On picking winners: the need for targeted support for renewable energy. ICEPT Working Paper for WWF (UK). London: Imperial College. Greenacre, P., Gross, R. &amp; Heptonstall, P. (2010). Great Expectations: The Cost of Offshore Wind in UK Waters - Understanding the past and projecting the future. UK Energy Research Centre. London. Skea, J. et al (2013) op. cit. Rosenow, J. and N. Eyre (2013) ‘The Green Deal and the Energy Company Obligation’ Proceedings of the ICE - Energy 

[[[166]]], 127-136  IEA (2012). Energy Policies of IEA Countries: The United Kingdom. Paris: IEA. Energy Research Partnership (2012). International Engagement. Unpublished report. London: ERP. Committee on Climate Change (2012). Building a low carbon economy: the UK’s innovation challenge. London: CCC. Energy Research Partnership (2012), op. cit. RCUK (2010) Progressing UK Energy Research for a Coherent Structure with Impact. Report of the International Panel for the RCUK Review of Energy 2010. Swindon: RCUK.&#xa0;