&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence f]]]

[[[rom The Rt.]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[Hon. Lord Howell of Guildford]]]

[[[ (USA 17)]]]

[[[Summary.]]] In the re-positioning process now necessitated by a total transformation in the international landscape Britain badly needs to recalibrate its relationship with America and with Washington thinking. The language now needs to be that of partnership and friendship, not compliance with, or subservience to, perceived American hegemony. . The essence of the change is contained in William Hague’s adage that the transatlantic relationship should be ‘solid, not slavish’.  There is no future at all in having a British leadership that appears intent on doing everything the USA tells it.   America now lives in a networked world in which the guiding principle has to be ‘partnership’, rather than ‘leadership’. This is not yet understood by some policy-makers, either in Washington or London.

[[[Partnership not Leadership]]]over the last fifteen to twenty years the chorus from the U.S. policy establishment has been one of repeated calls for America re-assume its leadership role in world affairs, to take the helm, to reassert the nation’s role as Number One superpower.This has been so right across the American political spectrum with leading voices of  Presidential candidates, Presidents, their campaigners and closest advisers all asking the same question – namely, how to get American back in charge, how to reverse foreign policy failure and reputational decline in the Middle East, how to become again THE global leader. But it is the wrong question and it leads to the wrong answers, both for the USA and for Britain’s relationship with it. There is no world waiting any longer for a powerful and resurgent America to step forward to dominate world affairs and impose its template on every regional and global issue. There is no prepared pedestal for America to climb back on to and raise the torch of freedom and democracy. That world has vanished. ‘An international order that reflects our values’ – the words of former Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice – is not available.In a network world gone ‘live’ with instant and intense connectivity – of a kind never before matched in human history -  no-one is on top or in a position to impose ‘our values’. Behaviour patterns on the part of any nation within the network can certainly shake the whole system, American behaviour especially so, given the sheer size of the U.S. within the world economy. But national or regional leaders who think that size still translates into command and dominance are deluding themselves, and – equally worryingly - their peoples.The delusion lies very deep in American policy. Back in 2008 there was the late Richard Holbrooke calling repeatedly for America to reassume the leadership role in world affairs as the new Obama platform took shape. (Foreign Affairs Quarterly) There was the arch-realist Henry Kissinger, half sensing the change to a more pluralist world, urging that: ‘while traditional patterns are in transition and the very basis of experience and knowledge is being revolutionised, America’s ultimate challenge is to transform its power into moral consensus , promoting its values not by imposition but by their willing acceptance in a world that, for all its seeming resistance, desperately needs enlightened leadership’. With his piercing realism Kissinger could not resist adding that ‘America’s continuing quest for hegemony was the surest way to destroy the values that made America great’. (Quotes from his book ‘Does America need a Foreign Policy’, 2001).

[[[Has America changed]]]

[[[?]]]Has the tone changed under the first and second Obama administrations? Not really. Or not at least for Obama’s Secretary of State Hillary Clinton during her term. In the New Statesman of July 2012 she is still arguing that the new international order ‘depends on American economic, military and diplomatic leadership’, although acknowledging that ‘new regional and global centres of influence are quickly emerging’.President Obama’s recent and obvious reluctance to go for early military intervention and missile assault against Syria, following the use of chemical weapons almost certainly by pro-Assad forces, may be the signs of a deeper shift in the American mood. The clear lessons of this saga have been that a) neither America nor the West as a whole are wise in future to act without the full cooperation of the new rising powers and alliances of the world outside the West, and b) that diplomacy and soft power have to be given an increasing priority over military action, even if the threat of ‘hard power’ is in the background as the last resort.But the American position was reached by an almost comically zig-zag route, by a chance remark from the US Secretary of State, Mr. Kerry, and from the President’s sudden thought that he might copy the path of  London thinking by  consulting the legislature – and perhaps, as with the British leaders, thereby be saved from his dilemma by the Parliamentary bell.The confusion has long since spread to American policy and attitudes towards the European Union. State Department officials have continued their prolonged campaign urging Britain to integrate into today’s  European Union, apparently blissfully unaware of the changing nature of the whole European process under the impact of new world conditions and new network pressures. Even President Obama has joined in this grievously ill-informed process. 

[[[The so-called ‘Pivot’ to the East.]]]What is one to make of assertions and reports that America is ‘turning east’ or ‘pivoting’, in its foreign policy preoccupations? Probably not very much. That language, too, seems to reflect a slim grasp of the new realities of a networked world. With or without dependence on Middle East oil and gas America is as wired up to Middle East events and instabilities as much as to Asian developments. In a network world there is no choice to be had between one region and another. Vulnerabilities exist to shocks and distortions in both. The dangers to America’s physical security arising from Middle East tensions, from jihadism or from the spill-over from the Islamic civil war being fought out in Syria with such savagery, are just as great as before. Entanglement with the fate of Israel remains undiminished, and may have become even more fraught following the first moves in the negotiations with Iran over uranium enrichment and nuclear power development – bitterly criticised by the Israeli leadership.Meanwhile, despite the prospect of American self-sufficiency in both oil and gas, and a cessation of oil imports from the Middle East altogether, American interests in a stable world oil market remain strong wherever the oil is produced and in whichever consumer direction it goes.Large displays of naval and military strength may have anyway ceased to be the way to win hearts and minds and persuade or influence – in fact they may achieve the opposite. For example, in the Far East, the US desire to ‘engage’ with China may not necessarily be helped by the US determination to keep its Pacific Fleet patrolling near to Chinese territorial waters and in the East China Seas. Some contend  that it is this ‘hard power’ manifestation , and the constant sense of antagonism and affront which it generates, which lie behind China’s current territorial spat with Japan.    Here, as elsewhere, Britain , both with its own deep experience in the Middle East region, and with its increasingly close friendship with, and interest  in, the still  giant Japanese economy,  may want to stay much clearer of US  strategy than it chose to do in  the case of the Iraq invasion. This would certainly be more in tune with the promotion of Britain’s own interests and with its re-positioning in a less West-dominated world.  There are, as often, two Americas with which to deal. On the one hand the old vitality and innovative brilliance remains, or returns, with low-cost power lifting the American economy out of the doldrums steadily and strongly. This is a trend which does not fit into the simplistic picture of Asia booming while the West declines. On the other hand there is an America full of self-doubt, dismayed by the bottomless complexity of Middle East politics, disillusioned with the results of heavy military intervention in Iraq and Afghanistan, and uncertain of its new role or how to handle Far East tensions.

[[[The best British approach]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[now.]]]For Britain the William Hague adage of a trans-Atlantic relationship which is ‘solid but not slavish’ is the right one to follow. Britain has everything to lose by being perceived either as Washington’s poodle and slavish emulator, or as just one piece in a broader European Union foreign policy over which it has only marginal influence.  In nation after nation, and across continents, the British strength lies in its uniquely strong soft power linkages, of which, incidentally, the Commonwealth network is one of the finest transmission mechanisms. Neither of the old perceptions – that British had only the narrow choice of destiny between Europe and America (or of some supposed bridge between the two)  -  allows the now growing  value of British influence and culture , drawing from  deep wells of goodwill towards all things British right round the world, to be developed. Neither perception allows for the increasingly favourable positioning of Britain in the new global network and in the new Commonwealth network within that larger one.A re-positioned and re-invigorated Britain can and must understand that things are now different. A leading British newspaper editor recently reiterated his view that ‘the US is still the most powerful nation on earth’. It is not. The digital web, linking billons of messages, contacts and opinions across the planet every minute, is now the most powerful ‘nation’ on earth .We are all the players within it and  new skills will be needed to operate in radically changed world conditions.   (NB. A fuller version of this analysis and  these arguments may be found in Lord Howell’s latest book – 

[[[Old Links and New Ties]]]; Power and Persuasion in an Age Of Networks, published by I.B.Tauris, November 2013)                                              12 December 2013&#xa0;