&#xa0;

[[[AFS0035]]]

[[[Written evidence submitted by Michael ]]]

[[[Pyke]]]Michael is a former Deputy Head of an urban comprehensive school.  He is a spokesperson for CASE (The Campaign for State Education) and the submission, although made in a personal capacity, is reflective of the policies of CASE.This submission addresses the Committee’s terms of reference in order and repeats them here for convenience.  The body of the submission is concerned to address the first term of reference in some detail.  The remaining terms of reference are addressed in the summary but are not further dealt with. There is 

[[[no evidence]]] that “academisation” per se has had 

[[[any]]] effect in narrowing the gap for disadvantaged children.  Both within and without the academies system there are three steps especially that could be taken to bring about a “transformational  impact.”  These are (1) to regulate admissions so as to ensure that every school has, as far as possible, a socially and academically balanced intake; (2) to develop a more highly educated and much more professionally expert teaching force, as in countries such as Finland; (3) to raise the Pupil Premium and other financial instruments to a level that is seriously effective in mitigating socio-economic disadvantage.Although highly desirable, these steps would still be less effective than fiscal policies designed to reduce inequality. Moreover, to implement Step1 would require qualities of leadership and political courage of which no party has shown any evidence in recent years.     It is abundantly clear that the vast majority of current academies have not made a free choice to adopt this status but have been strongly pressured to do so by successive secretaries of state, who have used every means at their disposal, including both financial bribery and the misuse of OFSTED to override the clearly expressed wishes of parents and other stakeholders.  As the experience of Sweden has shown, there is no case for the establishment of so-called “free” schools, which are a misuse of taxpayers’ money. Moreover, the process by which “free” schools are established is completely lacking in clarity and transparency.  Indeed, in this regard, there is disturbing evidence of the determination of the Secretary of State to thwart the intentions of the Freedom of Information Act.  Academy sponsors are not democratically accountable and ought to have no say in the expenditure of public money.     It is already clear that a system in which thousands of schools are directly responsible to the secretary of state is hopelessly impractical, unwieldy and inefficient. The Secretary of State has already recognised the truth of the above by proposing the creation of a “middle tier” and has, indeed, begun the process of advertising for “commissioners”.  However, this “tier” will consist chiefly of existing head teachers of academy schools and, as such, will not be democratically accountable.  Academy chains are an extremely undesirable phenomenon and the potential for the misuse of public money is obvious and considerable.  Currently they are not democratically accountable and represent a vehicle whereby the opinions and beliefs of people with no educational expertise may be imposed upon children.Given that academy status is inherently of little or no value, it cannot be appropriate for primary schools. There is no evidence that academy status can bring value for money. There is no reason to believe that sponsored academy status will make any significant difference to a failing school, unless such a change is accompanied by other, more pertinent, changes for which academy status is not a necessary condition.  In the medium term, it would be very beneficial to ensure that primary schools which serve the most deprived areas are staffed by teachers of experience and proven expertise.  Such teachers should be appropriately remunerated.  &#xa0;i) According to long and well established research findings, with which, of course, the Committee will be familiar, between 15% and 20% of educational outcomes can be attributed to schooling.  This is not an insignificant figure but it nevertheless provides an important context for any discussion of how any model of school provision can improve the prospects of children from deprived backgrounds.  ii) There is no great secret as to why children from deprived backgrounds do relatively poorly at school and there is no need to take up the Committee’s time by rehearsing the reasons, all of which have to do with the complex interaction of motivation and resources.  The question is how schools can help such children and whether or not the academy model is relevant.  The theory behind the model is that academy schools, not being bound by the National Curriculum,  are “free to innovate” but this idea, even if true, assumes that the needs of deprived children can be addressed by “innovation” (whatever that means). In terms of curriculum content, academy schools are, of course, no more free to “innovate” than any other type of school, for the simple reason that they are evaluated with reference to their pupils’ performance in “high stakes”, externally administered examinations.  They are, of course, free to experiment with such things as the length of the school day and the length and number of school terms and they are free, up to a point, to set their own terms and conditions for the employment of teachers but few academy schools have shown any wish to make use of these freedoms and there is no reason to suppose that, if they did, it would help to narrow the attainment gap between deprived children and the rest.  These “freedoms” are simply not relevant to the problem.  It is, therefore, not surprising that, claims to the contrary by the DFE notwithstanding, academy schools overall have failed to bring about any narrowing of the attainment gap between deprived and other children.  Of course, it is possible to point to particular academy schools that have achieved excellent results but to generalise from such examples is not helpful.  A case in point is Mossbourne Academy, which has achieved spectacularly better results than its predecessor, Hackney Downs School.  It is impossible, however, to show that Mossbourne’s success is in any way due to its status as an academy, rather than to a combination of outstanding leadership, superior resources and a pupil intake much less deprived than that of its predecessor.  Indeed, among the original group of “City Academies” set up by Labour, Mossbourne is almost uniquely successful.     iii) However, the experience of other countries, most notably Finland, shows that there are measures which could be taken to make school a more positive and successful experience for the children under discussion.  Firstly, our secondary schools should be made genuinely comprehensive in character.  There is considerable evidence, of which the Committee will be aware, that the climate of learning within a school is optimised when a minimum of 25% of the pupils are well motivated to succeed and already support the school’s educational aims.  Such children may be called a “critical mass” and their presence in a school has been shown to have a powerful effect upon the motivation of the majority of other pupils.  To obtain such a “critical mass” in every school requires admissions policies to be based upon the need for every school to have a socially and academically balanced intake but to achieve this would require a level of leadership and courage that seems no longer to exist among our politicians, who, since 1988 have adhered to a consumerist model of schooling, in which the provision of “choice and diversity” is given priority over the actual effectiveness of outcomes.  Secondly, our teaching force is insufficiently expert to tackle the problems of learning and motivation experienced by most deprived children.  The one year PGCE, although better than nothing, is not a sufficient guarantor of the level of expertise needed.  We should look to adopt the Finnish model, in which not only are teachers very highly educated but are then subject to a rigorous selection process, followed by a minimum of three years post-graduate training, with regular occasions for further professional development.  Thirdly, we should introduce financial instruments which make a seriously significant contribution to reducing the material inequality from which deprived children suffer.  Universally provided free school meals (another Finnish idea) would be a start.  The Pupil Premium, although a good idea, is simply too small to make a significant difference.iv) The success of Finnish education reminds us that an aspect of schooling which is regularly ignored in current educational discourse is that of the prestige and status which adheres to a school and, therefore, to its pupils.  Britain is a deeply unequal society in which the activities of the rich carry high status and prestige, while those of the poor are largely despised.  Unfortunately, this also applies to the schools which are attended by different sections of society.  The existence of a powerful independent sector, together with the emphasis placed upon “parental choice” within the state system by successive governments has created a hierarchy among our schools.  Those schools at the top of the hierarchy are able to exercise considerable influence over admissions and, in effect, choose their pupils.  Those at the bottom are obliged to take the children that the more advantaged schools do not want.  Very many deprived children already suffer from low morale and low self-esteem and their motivation to succeed at school is not helped by their acute awareness that they attend a school which reinforces their lowly status.  The converse is equally true for children who attend a school with high status.  Unfortunately, the continuing development of the academy programme is likely to aggravate, rather than ameliorate this problem, as academies become responsible for their own admissions.  It is to be hoped that the Committee will take note that a common characteristic of the world’s most successful education systems is the relative absence of a hierarchy of schools. v) All this having been said, rather than focus upon the 

[[[effects]]] of deprivation, it would be far more effective to find ways of reducing socio-economic inequality.  Of course, this is outside the Committee’s remit but it is simply unrealistic and flying in the face of all evidence, not to mention common sense, to suppose that the education system can ever do more than slightly ameliorate the results of structural injustice.December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;