&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence s]]]

[[[ubmitted by ]]]

[[[Rebekah]]]

[[[ Jane Butler]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]I have recently graduated from Royal Holloway, University of London achieving a First Class Honours degree in Biology. The flexibility of the degree allowed me to focus my courses in the area of Marine Sciences and conservation excelling in the following courses: Marine Biology, Marine Ecology and Biodiversity, Marine Microbiology, and Conservation. I am currently preparing for a 2 month trip to Cambodia where I will be working with Marine Conservation Cambodia studying a research internship in Marine Conservation with the hope to be accepted by the University of Exeter to study MSc Conservation and Biodiversity beginning September 2014. In my time at Royal Holloway I completed a dissertation in form of a scientific literary review on the use and efficacy of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) focusing on their design (size and number), implementation and monitoring. I am supplying extracts of my dissertation with hope that you  might be able to draw conclusions on the need and importance of more MPAs in the UK.&#xa0;&#xa0;Throughout conducting my research a clear multistep process was apparent when establishing marine protected zones; establishing the objectives and goals, identifying suitable locations, determining size, as well as number and distribution and lastly, the implementation and monitoring (NAS, 2004; Airame et al., 2003). However, designing MPAs is not this straightforward; this design process may be prone to flaws if important factors are not taken into account that may lead to ineffective and insufficient reserves.&#xa0;As in September 2011 the Joint Nature Conservation Committee and Natural England recommended 127 potential MCZ’s, with only 27 designated MCZs being announced in November 2013 I will not include information here concerning the process of choosing MPZs, I shall only supply information on design efforts and factors that may affect successful implementation. &#xa0;

[[[Objectives and goals]]]Since the amended Marine and Coastal act 2009 (Marine Management Organisation, 2012) in order to establish the objectives and goals of a reserve all the main stakeholders must be involved and intrinsically linked throughout the planning and implementing process. Before objectives and goals can be established all stakeholders must be identified both within and the surrounding areas of the reserve (Nursey-Bray, 2011; Rees et al., 2012).&#xa0;The Oxford Dictionary describes a stakeholder as ‘a person with an interest or concern in something, especially a business’ (OED, 2013). Stakeholders may include conservationists and scientists, fisheries and other businesses as well as the local community itself. The goals and objectives of individual stakeholders are often different and can therefore cause conflict as all groups aim towards sustainability at the maximum benefit or lowest cost (National Academy of Sciences, 2001); however what stakeholders want to ‘sustain’ often differs. For example conservationists may want to protect large areas by ‘no-take’ reserves in order to protect unique or threatened ecosystems whereas large commercial fishing businesses will argue against this as the area of lost fishing ground would be too great for their business to be sustainable (Klein et al., 2008) as fisheries must rely on marine reserves to supply sustainable levels of adults and larvae to areas that are not within reserves by natural mobility and dispersal rates (Halpern, 2003). Therefore the reserves must cover a significant proportion of total stock area; an optimal coverage has been estimated from 20-50% depending on fishing pressure and other factors such as the mobility of the target catch (Roberts et al., 2003; National Academy of Science, 2004). These differences have often led to controversy, especially between the users of marine resources under management, and many fishing and commercial industries argue that reserves are not designed, located or evaluated correctly (Agardy et al., 2011); although there is some evidence of this within scientific literature, as some reserves were established rapidly in order to protect an ecosystem against a serious known and imposing threat, most reserves now follow a comprehensive planning and management strategy. &#xa0;Halpern (2003) describes opposition of marine reserves to have resulted from a lack of understanding, an ignorance of significant questions that need to be asked and answered. Moreover is the possibility that there are poor explanations of the effectiveness of marine reserves in meeting stakeholder goals and targets, as many marine reserves can produce a win-win situation in conserved areas as fish populations, biomass, size and biodiversity increase (Fox et al., 2011). When all stakeholders are involved it is possible to compose a list of objectives and goals that are representative and achievable using ecological and socioeconomic aspects, examples of objectives may be the protection of representative habitats within a region; the protection of unique and vulnerable sites; to the restoration and enhancement of fish stocks thus generating the ability to benefit all stakeholders involved.&#xa0;

[[[Does size matter?]]]The size of marine reserve is a common factor when critiquing the efficacy of marine reserves and the size of marine protected areas throughout the oceans currently range from &lt;1km2 to &gt;100km2 (Halpern and Warner, 2002). Many factors are needed to determine the size of marine reserves, such as the objectives and goals; level of use; critical communities needing protection; specific features of the local area; quality and amount of habitat as well as the life history characteristics of target species e.g. dispersal (National Academy of Sciences, 2001). &#xa0;Just as objectives and goals are needed to determine location, they also influence reserve size. As briefly described before stakeholders often want different things, for conservationists ‘the bigger, the better’ as more habitat and more populations are protected and larger sizes offer a buffering effect against environmental variation and unforeseen events (Halpern, 2003). However for fisheries, the benefit does not increase directly with size (Airame et al., 2003).  The reserve must be big enough to allow the increase in populations of target species, yet small enough for a significant proportion of adults to ‘spill-over’ the edge of the marine reserves and therefore increase the fisheries catch (Klein et al., 2008). Large marine reserves can also lead to other socio-economic conflicts, for example, local fishermen in developing countries often ‘fish the edge’ of marine reserves due to the higher abundance of fish (Harrabin, 2012). However when the marine protected area grows in , the creation of potential ‘winners’ and ‘losers’ grows as those at the edge benefit and those ‘stuck’ in the middle lose out (Harrabin, 2012; Gray, 1997).&#xa0;Another main factor that should be considered when determining the size of marine reserves is the life history characteristics of a species to be conserved, especially when considering dispersal rates. The reliance of fishermen on the mobility of target species out of the reserve has been discussed; however dispersal rates are an integral factor when determining the size of a marine reserve. Throughout the majority of marine taxa, pelagic larval stages are prevalent (Bradbury, 2008). Emphasising a high degree of openness and interconnectedness in the ocean larval stages may disperse great distances before settling and developing (Bradbury, 2008; Nursey-Bray, 2011). Due to the lack of knowledge of dispersal rates and inescapable features of the ocean, such as its degree of openness, it has been believed for many years that marine organisms generally have extremely broad-scale dispersal rate (Nursey-Bray, 2011). In the past decade evidence has been brought to light suggesting the surprising ‘closed nature’ of marine populations, as technological advancements allow further investigations into tracking and tagging marine organisms (Bradbury, 2008) with organisms such as corals, sponges, seaweeds, tunicates, gastropods, amphipods and some fish species only dispersing from a few meters to a few kilometres (Roberts et al., 2001). However some more nomadic species do exist (&gt;100km) and the suggestion of closed marine populations was inferred from a dataset that will not represent all species of a marine ecosystem, as research methods in this area are limited (Levin, 2006). When establishing a reserve towards the protection of one target species the consideration of dispersal rates may influence the size of a marine reserve more, however when approaching from a more holistic level, it is impossible to accommodate a ‘one size fits all’ approach as the dispersal patterns of organisms varies greatly. Roberts et al. (2001) expand on this point; describing that extensive knowledge of dispersal rates for all species present is unnecessary to select the right location. In order to combat the vast variation in the dispersal rates of species Roberts et al. (2001), many other scientists and marine management strategies already in existence describe the benefits of using a network of marine reserves (Roberts et al., 2001; Airame et al., 2003; NRC, 2001; Nursey-Bray, 2011; Halpern, 2003) which will be discussed under the next subheading. &#xa0;An effective way to determine marine reserve size may include reviewing the success of other marine reserves in terms of their abilities to reach objectives and goals, in other words: does the size of marine reserve matter at all? Many suggest that ‘bigger is better’ (Nursey-Bray, 2011) and following McArthur and Wilson’s work on island biogeography in 1967 it is assumed that the greater the area, the greater species diversity, however this theory does not describe the potential influence of protection on biodiversity at a specific location, and I have already highlighted the potential conflicts that may occur due to large reserves. Due to these contradictions and the scepticism by many that current marine reserves are too small, there is a large amount of scientific literature studying the effect of marine reserve size on their success. One of the most extensive studies into this topic was carried out by Halpern in 2003 and consisted of a review into empirical evidence gathered from 89 different studies in order to assess the impact of marine reserve size on biological measures such as biomass, biodiversity, organism size and density. The results of this review were particularly surprising as they showed that the proportional effect of the marine reserve is independent of size. This can be illustrated with the smallest reserve studied measuring just 0.026km2 (St Lucia), this small reserve showed the doubling of biomass per unit area which is also observed in larger reserves. However it is important to consider the fact that the independence of marine reserve size on effect is relative. It is true that smaller reserves can be as successful as larger reserves, but this indicates a greater absolute increase in success for larger areas e.g. doubling the number of fish in a small reserve may be the equivalent of a population increase from 100 to 200, whereas larger reserves encompass a larger area and therefore will consist of larger populations, the equivalent therefore being nearer to an increase in population size from 10000 – 20000 (Halpern, 2003; Halpern &amp; Warner, 2002). This evidence shows that how effective protected areas can be and their importance to marine conservation. The final process when determining the size of a marine sanctuary is to add an insurance factor which consists of adding a percentage ~1-5% more of protected areas on top of that already decided, if exposed to unforeseen catastrophes this insurance factor will increase the chances of some preserved and unaffected habitats allowing the reserve and those organisms living inside a greater chance of survival and adaptability (Roberts el al., 2001). &#xa0;

[[[Number and distribution of reserves]]]Determining the number and distribution of reserves is closely linked with determining the size of marine reserves and has been a subject of controversy since the beginning of marine reserve implementation. For example the question of ‘single large or several small’ often abbreviated to ‘SLOSS’ has been discussed for many (National Academy of Sciences, 2001). However this is a terrestrial application and yet again does not consider many aspects unique to marine systems. For example, in marine systems boundaries do not consist of structures that prevent movement and therefore boundaries may be blurred. This also means organisms are able to live in-between protected areas (Roberts et al., 2003). However if all marine aspects are considered it offers an approachable question that can be used by design planners. Many aspects that are used to answer the SLOSS question have already been described in detail throughout other sections of this report (e.g. dispersal rates). The staggering range of dispersal rates of marine organisms can be incorporated thoughtfully into marine reserve design by establishing multiple protected areas at varying distances from each other. These distances and positions should also consider oceanographic factors such as currents that may form dispersal routes. This approach may be more representative of the area and offers an effective way to achieve large scale control whilst at the same time allowing the customised protection of zones within the larger area. Table 2 (see attached) displays criteria set out by the IUCN, describing the levels of protection available for MPAs. It shows that critical habitats may be protected by no take zones whereas other areas may have restricted use only increasing the likelihood of achieving the stakeholder’s multiple objectives. This method would also increase the benefits to the artisan fishermen, as well as commercial fishing industries as many reserves moderately spaced would increase the fish stocks, as well as forming more ‘edges’ at which greater benefits (i.e. more fish) can be obtained. The establishment of a network of marine reserves also allows the protection of several replicate populations, increasing the chances of survival and adaptability with changing environmental conditions. It also offers a valuable way to represent habitats within a region, for example in the Channel Islands (California) case study (Airame et al., 2003) it was suggested that 30-50% of each habitat found should be protected. This is a figure reached upon by many independent studies that I have investigated throughout my research. Roberts et al. (2003) calculated that by protecting just 30%+ of habitats, 80% of the populations concerned will be effectively conserved. Other studies support this as it has been calculated that commercial fisheries will receive the optimum benefit if the reserve covers between 20-50% of total stock area of the target species (Rees et al., 2013). There is also a consensus throughout the literature for representation and replication, as many studies reach the same conclusions; all habitats should be represented and there should be from one to four (preferably 3) examples of each habitat to be protected. These reserves are also suggested to be moderately spaced ranging from 10-50km apart (Nursey-Bray, 2011).&#xa0;

[[[Implementation and monitoring ]]]Providing that there is on-going communication between all of the stakeholders involved the implementation of the marine reserve should run smoothly, of course this process is not this straightforward. There are hundreds of laws and jurisdictions that may be different depending on the location of the marine reserve. Although this report will not expand on the legislative policies involved in marine reserve design some policies do mandate the involvement of all stakeholder’s throughout the design and implementation process of marine reserves, as well as their future monitoring and evaluation (Marine and Coastal act 2009 (Marine Management Organisation, 2012)). &#xa0;The performance of the marine reserve should be evaluated regularly throughout the monitoring of the marine reserve, in order to understand any progress that is occurring as well as any amendments that are necessary. Those designing marine reserves must allow for adaptations to be made in the future if need be, therefore boundaries and regulations should be made with this in mind. The use of adaptive management will allow the marine reserve to be improved over time and will optimise its effectiveness. The monitoring of programmes should include the assessment of not only changes to the ecosystem, but also the effectiveness of management and socio-economic outcomes, such as economic impacts and public opinion. The continual monitoring of reserve effectiveness also provides tools for scientific research. The design process of all reserves should be based on scientific information and the monitoring of marine reserves will offer more scientific literature that can be used in the future. Marine reserves not only provide information for the establishment of future and more effective marine conservation, they also provide unique areas that offer rare opportunities for research into the structure, function and variation of marine ecosystems. &#xa0;

[[[Conclusion]]]The scientific literature researched for this report consisted of many examples of marine reserve implementation, marine reserve design guidelines as well as other studies reviewing their success. However it is important to use caution when using this source of information, as many studies included issues that may hinder inference from their findings. Many reviews have criticised the lack of scientific literature relating to this area of study, however this problem was not encountered during this review. The data sets available were abundant, which can explained by the continual rise in awareness and growing perception of ocean systems by humans; however the data available had to be analysed and interpreted carefully. Many contained mistakes that heavily influenced their significance and validity, for example many studies used replications of their studies at different locations within the same reserve therefore, unknowingly, using pseudoreplicates for their investigations and many studies did not contain control sites. Despite this throughout the research and evidence discussed in this report it is clear to see that MPAs are clearly one of the most powerful methods available in marine conservation efforts today.&#xa0;When considering the research and evidence discussed in this report it is clear to see that the best marine protected areas i.e. those that are ecologically viable whilst providing the needs of all stakeholders, consist of a network of moderately sized reserves that are variably spaced. This report was approached with the strong opinion that current reserves are insufficient at dealing with the human impacts forced upon the oceans and that, most significantly, the use of small reserves (&lt;1km-&lt;10km) were completely pointless. However it is shown clearly that the implementation of marine reserve networks shows significant positive outcomes for the vast majority of times (Nursey-Bray, 2011; Halpern, 2003) even when extremely small or implemented with no scientific thought. However this should not promote the haphazard approach to marine reserve design as the efficacy and viability of marine reserves may be optimized by following the steps mentioned in this report and considering the variety of factors involved at each stage. This discovery is expanded on further when we consider that the outcomes of reserves are independent of size; however this is not to say that size does not matter. The significant result from small reserves is a positive outcome and is valuable knowledge to marine conservation, but when approached realistically, larger reserves result in greater absolute effects, even more effective is the use of many marine reserves. Considering the extent of human influences on marine systems, if we are to continue utilising marine resources, larger reserves are needed in greater quantities such as in the form of grand networks must be implemented. It was previously mentioned that 1.7% of the ocean is protected by marine reserves and although this percentage is low, the percentage of no take zones currently stands at only 0.01% highlighting the need for more marine protected areas (IUCN, 2012).&#xa0;In 2005 the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) set a target towards protecting at least 10% of all coastal marine systems however, as still only ~2% of our oceans are being protected, this target has been pushed back to 2020 (MPA news, 2010) which emphasises and supports my closing point. Current methods are promising; however their implementation must increase if we are to sustain viable marine populations for future generations, at the same time as utilising their resources. Although this may give the impression that the aim towards the sustainable use of our oceans is unrealistic the many reserves that have already been established show impressive results even doubling the biomass of an area (Fox et al., 2011) and the sheer lack of reserves allows the opportunity to ensure that those implemented from now on, are designed in such a way as described in this report to optimise their efficacy. Although to insure this outcome pressure must be put on the legislative boards involved at regional, national and international levels to ensure their implementation as this a serious threat that not only leads to concerns for marine organisms but also the human population as livelihoods continue to be affected in coastal regions and food security issues grow.&#xa0;

[[[References]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]Airame, S., Dugan, E.D., Lafferty, K.D., Leslie, H., McCardle, D.A., &amp; Warner, R.R., 2003.    Applying ecological criteria to marine reserve design: A case study from the California Channel Islands, Ecological Applications, 13: 170-184&#xa0;Agardy, T., Sciara, G.N., &amp; Christie, P., 2011. Mind the gap: Addressing the shortcomings of marine protected areas through large scale marine spatial planning, Marine Policy, 35: 226-232&#xa0;Allison, G.W., Lubchenco, J., &amp; Carr, M.H., 1998. Marine reserves are necessary but not sufficient for marine conservation. Ecological Applications, 8: 79-92&#xa0;Bradbury, I.R., Laurel, B., Snelgrove, P.V.R., Bentzen, P., &amp; Campana, S.E., 2008. Global patterns in marine dispersal estimates: the influence of geography, taxonomic category and life history. Proceedings of the Royal Society Biological Sciences, 275: 1803-1809&#xa0;Fox, H.E., Mascia, M.B., Basurto, X., Costa, A., Glew, A., Heineman, D., Karrer, L.B., Lester, S.E., Lombana, A.V., Pomeroy, R.S., Recchia, C.A., Roberts, C.M., Sanchiro, J.N., Soede, P.L., &amp; White, A.T., 2012. Reexamining the science of marine protected areas: linking knowledge to action, Conservation Letters, 5: 1-10Gray, J.C., 1997. Marine biodiversity: patterns, threats and conservation needs. Biodiversity and Conservation, 6: 153-175&#xa0;Halpern, B., &amp; Warner, R.R., 2002. Marine reserves have rapid and lasting effects, Ecology Letters, 5: 361-366&#xa0;Halpern, B.S., 2003. The impact of marine reserves: Do reserves work and does reserve size matter? Ecological Applications, 13: 117-137&#xa0;Halpern, B.S., Walbridge, S., Selkoe, K.A., Kappel, C.V, Micheli, C.A., Bruno, J.F., Casey, K.S., Evert, C., Fox, H.E., Fujita, R., Heinemann, D., Lenihan, H.S., Madin, E.M., Perry, M.T., Selig, E.R., Spalding, M., Steneck, R., &amp; Watson, R. 2008. A global map of human impact on marine ecosystems. Science, 319: 948-952&#xa0;International News and Analysis on Marine Protected Areas, 2010. MPA News: With global MPA coverage falling short of 10% target, biodiversity summit extends deadline. [pdf] Available at &lt;http://depts.washington.edu/mpanews/MPA117.pdf&gt; [Accessed 11 January]&#xa0;IUCN, 2012. The convention on biological diversity brings focus to the remote ocean. Available at &lt;http://www.iucn.org/about/work/programmes/marine/marine_our_work/marine_mpas/?11310/The-Convention-on-Biological-Diversity-brings-focus-to-the-remote-ocean&gt; [Accessed 9 January]Klein, C.J., Chan, A., Kircher, L., Cundiff, A.J., Gardner, N., Hrovat, Y., Schoiz, A., Kendall, B.E., &amp; Airame., 2008. Striking a balance between biodiversity conservation and socioeconomic viability in the design of marine protected areas. Conservation Biology, 22: 691-701&#xa0;MacArthur, R.H., and Wilson, E.O., 1967. The theory of island biogeography. Acta Biotheoretica. 50: 133-136&#xa0;Marine Management Organisation, 2012. Stakeholder Engagement Strategy [pdf] Available at &lt;http://www.marinemanagement.org.uk/about/documents/stakeholder_engagement.pdf&gt; [Accessed 17 January]&#xa0;Myers, R.A., Hutchings, J.A., &amp; Barrowman, N.J., 1997. Why do fish stocks collapse? The example of Cod in Atlantic Canada. Ecological Applications, 7: 91-106&#xa0;National Academy of Sciences, 2001. Marine protected areas: Tools for sustaining ocean ecosystems. National Academies Press, 6-10&#xa0;United States Code, 2000. National Marine Sanctuaries Act [pdf] Available at &lt;http://sanctuaries.noaa.gov/library/national/nmsa.pdf&gt; [Accessed 18 December]&#xa0;Roberts, C.M., Andleman, S., Branch, G., Bustamante, R.H., Carlos Castilla, J., Dugan, J., Halpern, B.S., Lafferty, K.D., Leslie, H., Lubchenco, J., McArdle, D., Possingham, H.P., Ruckelshaus, M., &amp; Warner, R.R., 2003. Criteria for evaluating candidate sites for marine reserves. Ecological Applications, 13: 199-214&#xa0;Roberts, C.M., Halpern, B., Palumbi, S.R., &amp; Warner, R.R., 2001. Designing marine reserve networks: why small, isolated protected areas are not enough, Conservation in Practice, 2: 10 – 17&#xa0;18 January 2014              &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;