&#xa0;The Association of Directors of Children's Services (ADCS) values the opportunity to respond to the call for evidence into Academies and Free Schools. ADCS is the professional association for directors of children's services and their senior management teams. Under the provisions of the Children Act 2004, the DCS is the chief officer responsible for the discharge of local authority functions with regard to the education of all children in their local area. The DCS provides a clear and unambiguous line of professional accountability for children’s services, including education and as such, has a particular interest in the performance of academies and free schools. Directors of children’s services are statutorily responsible for the education of every child in their local area regardless of where they receive their schooling. ADCS believes that local authorities have a key role to play in the improvement and performance of all schools regard of their designation, and as such has a pro-active interest in the governance and scrutiny of academies and free schools. The announcement of the establishment of eight regional commissioners for education by the Department for Education in December 2013 has added a new dimension to the intervention and monitoring of academies and free schools. At the moment it is unclear what role the new commissioners will have in monitoring and intervening in low performing academies that are not currently failing. It must be the goal of all involved to prevent schools from failing in the first place, rather than simply issuing warning notices or using other intervention powers after the failure has occurred. Regional commissioners will not be directly nor democratically accountable locally and the size and structure of the eight regions mean it is unlikely that they will be able to develop the detailed understanding of local schools that the local authority has. Further clarification on the role of regional commissioners in monitoring and challenging low performing academies and free schools, and their proposed interaction with the role of the local authority, would be most welcome. Chains of academies are not currently subject to inspection as local authorities are. We would advocate that inspection of academy chains, and the support they provide for their schools is subject to inspection by Ofsted in the future. The underperformance of any school should be subject to local scrutiny, and if possible a locally provided solution should be found before academy status is considered. At present any formal action taken by a local authority to secure improved performance in an underperforming school, such as the use of warning notices or an IEB appears to be a trigger for the consideration of a forced conversion to academy status by the Department for Education. Allowing local authorities to intervene and secure locally delivered solutions to improve schools would be preferable to the swift conversion to academy status. &#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;