&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[House of Lords European Union Sub-Committee B (internal Market, Infrastructure and Employment)]]]

[[[: ]]]

[[[EU action to tackle youth unemployment]]]&#xa0;Introduction and Context&#xa0;In the course of their inquiry the Sub-Committee received oral evidence on Monday 4th November from three academic researchers and commentators: Professor Sue Maguire, Dr Paul Copeland and myself.  This note sets out the more important points covered in my oral evidence.  A supplementary paper, prepared at the Sub-Committee’s request, offers some examples of current good practice. &#xa0;The Sub-Committee’s investigations follow the announcement of the European Youth Guarantee and the establishment of the Youth Employment Initiative (YEI).  The Youth Guarantee is a formal pledge that young people (up to age 25) should receive a good-quality offer of employment, continued education, an apprenticeship or a traineeship within a period of four months of becoming unemployed or leaving formal education.  The YEI is an EU funding initiative established to support the Guarantee: initially, in February 2013, six billion euro was pledged for that purpose; this was extended in July with an additional two million euro commitment for countries with a youth unemployment rate above 25%.  &#xa0;The Youth Guarantee is a recommendation, with member countries given the opportunity to tailor their activities to national, regional and local circumstances.  In responding to a request for information in advance of my appearance before the Sub-Committee, a DWP Information Officer e-mailed: &#xa0;We have not made a formal response. As I'm sure you're aware, the Youth Guarantee is a non-binding EU recommendation so we are not obliged to implement it.&#xa0;We implemented the Youth Contract in April 2012, almost a year before the Youth Guarantee recommendation was agreed. The Youth Contract broadly meets the underlying aims of the Youth Guarantee and we will be reporting how the Youth Contract fits with these aims in more detail as requested by the European Commission by the end of the year. Our position on the Youth Guarantee is that this would be inappropriate for the UK. Over 80 per cent of young people flow off Jobseekers' Allowance within 6 months in the UK, so a four month guarantee would incur high deadweight losses (we'd spend money offering the guarantee on lots of people who would have got a job anyway) and wouldn't be cost effective.&#xa0;This clearly suggests limited enthusiasm for the idea within UK Government.&#xa0;Definitions and Recording&#xa0;It is understandable that the Sub-Committee has put considerable efforts into gaining a better appreciation of the terminology in use (‘youth unemployment’, ‘worklessness’, ‘NEETS’).  The comments offered by Professor Macguire and Dr Copeland to the first question asked at the oral session offered a most useful elaboration here.  Broadly we can comment on statistics taken from the quarterly Labour Force Survey (which includes reports on the number of 16-24 year old unemployed) and a claimant count (based on young people receiving Job Seekers Allowance). &#xa0;My view is that you must define the problem before you can offer a critique and evaluation of current solutions.  Only then can you identify the most appropriate metrics. There is a muddled and confused agenda with a multitude of schemes, often sounding the same, but with different intentions and aimed at different target populations.   It is important to distinguish between: initiatives that are designed to reduce youth unemployment (or worklessness); schemes that are designed to give young people the opportunity to develop work-related skills (‘welfare to work’ intended to increase an individual’s short and long-term prospects for employability); schemes that are designed to develop work-force skills that underpin international competitiveness (irrespective of the short-term impact on employment).  The key distinction is ‘skills or employment?’   ‘Apprenticeship’ offers a good example of the ambiguity that can arise: is the current advocacy of apprenticeships intended to improve workforce skills or to reduce the number of workless young people?  If the former, the emphasis would be on the quality and the reputation of apprenticeship programmes; if the latter, the emphasis would be on the sheer numbers of participants.  &#xa0;Such discussions are more than semantic.  To reiterate: it is impossible to determine the most useful metrics without first deciding your underlying intention. Here the Local Government Association (in a publication in support of their most impressive ‘Hidden Talents’ project) commented that one of the problems arose because of the number of different Government department involved.  “Services are largely funded through three Government Departments. The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) funds employment programmes – primarily the Work Programme…. The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS) funds further and higher education and post-18 skills training, while the Department for Education (DfE) funds education and training for the 16-19s. DfE funding for 16-19 Apprentices (and the forthcoming Traineeships) is administered through the BIS Skills Funding Agency”.  They argued that this led to “no common concept of ‘success’ to measure” and that “the information provided does not let others derive a common measure” and concluded&#xa0;We recommend that central government departments should adopt a common framework for providing information on their programmes and that Local Authorities should use a Young Person’s Scorecard to scrutinise the extent of central government funded provision and its performance for their young residents.&#xa0;Defining the problem&#xa0;The dominant problem should be seen to be that of youth unemployment.  There are simply far too many young people out of work.  Figures released in October 2013 show that youth unemployment is static at the 20% mark. There are now just under one million unemployed 16-24 year olds.  This figure (958,000) was down by a mere 1000 on the previous quarter with male unemployment increasing marginally.  Moreover, such figures understate the extent of the problem.  For example in her oral evidence Professor Maguire drew attention to the high numbers of workless young women who did not feature in the labour statistics. There seems to be little short-term prospect of sustained improvement. Indeed, the Work Foundation has argued that, since the start of the recession, the UK has experienced the fastest rise in youth unemployment of any of the Group of Eight (G8) countries &#xa0;Given this perspective the Youth unemployment level published on a quarterly basis that gives figures for the number of unemployed 16-24 year old should be regarded as the key target.  It does not record participation on schemes (for example apprenticeships) but is unambiguous and focuses on what matters most to young people and their families.  It has the additional advantage that it allows international comparisons – NEETs by contrast is a definition that receives particular attention in the UK alone.  If this focus on the Youth unemployment level is accepted Government reporting for the EU Youth Guarantee implementation plan should be presented accordingly.&#xa0;The underlying causes&#xa0;There is inevitably a range of perspectives on the underlying causes of the crisis, and hence the solutions.  Some would argue that what is required is a more efficient job market and more effective job matching to clear the market.  Others argue that young people themselves are contributing to the problem by displaying a negative attitude and unwillingness to acquire the skills that employers value.  These perspectives should be rejected.  Far more important is the effect of major structural changes in the labour market.  The shifting patterns caused by global competition means that there are insufficient, low skill, entry-level jobs for young people.  The following illustration may assist.  &#xa0;In the 1930s in Norwich, the major employment centre in Norfolk, 25% of boys and 33% of girls leaving elementary schools found employment in boot and shoe factories.  Another 14% of girls found employment in the cracker and chocolate factories.  These jobs have disappeared.  Start-rite, the well-regarded manufacturer of children’s shoes, was a major employer in the city.  Currently the firm manufactures in the Far East, Spain and Portugal. In a recent prominent feature in the local newspaper the managing director indicated that, although wages in the Far East were rising, production would only come back to Britain “if there are enough skilled workers to do it”.  In the 1980s the major service industry employer, Norwich Union, was often cited in articles on the ‘demographic time-bomb’ (a term used to describe what was seen at the time as worrying population trends) as likely to employ all the available school-leavers in the city.  Now the local headlines are of 2000 young people without work and this has lead to the creation of a propaganda campaign, Norwich for Jobs, which only serves to mask the underlying problem of insufficient entry-level jobs.&#xa0;This dearth of jobs for young people ranks as one of the most compelling social problems of our time.  People learn their skills at work and develop through working.  Training schemes delivered by third party providers cannot offer an acceptable substitute, however well designed.  Public pronouncements and surveys continually emphasise that school-leavers need leadership, team-working and communication skills.  This is no doubt true.  However the best way in which such skills are developed is through experience in the workplace with the guidance of a committed boss who is willing to spare the time to give immediate guidance and on-going feedback. &#xa0;Too many schemes and over-promotion&#xa0;It is against this background that the effectiveness of the current cocktail of schemes and programmes must be considered.  Generally such programmes can be described as ‘Active labour market policies (ALMPs)’.  These can address the supply side (training etc.), the demand side (e.g. incentives for employers to recruit particular workers) and job matching (e.g. careers guidance).   The templates designed by the EU Commission for Youth Guarantee implementation plans are designed to allow the different emphasis in member states to be identified.  However, implementation of schemes, takes place at the micro-level: the level of the firm. The decision on how, when and where to invest in skills development inside a company is a third-order decision. First-order decisions relate to the choice of product market and competitive strategy. Once these strategies have been established, they have an impact on second-order decisions, which concern the way in which work is organised and jobs are designed. There is nothing that any government can do to make skills development become a first-order decision. No amount of exhortation will persuade employers to do something they do not see as being in their interest.&#xa0;For decades, UK skills policies have been formulated without serious debate at a political level. There has been a voluntarist approach: an attempt to secure tripartite (government, employers and workforce representatives) support for policy initiatives. Unfortunate unintended consequences have been the continual search for ‘the solution’ and heavy promotion of the latest scheme or programme. There have been seemingly endless launches and conferences – what can be described as continuous hortatory activity. There has been initiative fatigue.  Considerable confusion arises from this proliferation of schemes, many of which have similar style or names.  Many conscientious training managers will try to avoid being involved or engaged since no one else in their organisation is interested and they know that their tenure will outlast today’s initiative.  On occasions the over-selling and over-promotion takes a comical turn.  A 2013 edition of the BIS FE &amp; Skills newsletter used the term celebrate or celebrating nine times in claiming success for a latest array of schemes. &#xa0;In her recent evidence to the Work and Pensions Committee of the House of Commons (30th October) a CBI spokesperson stated that a mapping exercise they had conducted identified 48 schemes that could help an employer take on or train a young unemployed person.  The Local Government Association in the first of its Hidden Talents Reports identified 35 different programmes involving 16-24 year olds .  &#xa0;As was noted in the opening section of this document, the Government has identified the Youth Contract as the mechanism used to meet the requirements of the EU Youth Guarantee.  This particular scheme illustrates and emphasises many of the inherent problems in this initiative-led approach. The Youth Contract was launched in April 2012 and described as a package of schemes aimed at helping young people into sustained employment, combining existing schemes with new ones.  In July 2013 official figures revealed that it had the added wage incentive element had been paid out for just 4,690 young people out of a potential of 160,000.  At the same time it was announced that the Cabinet Office would conduct a cross-government review into schemes designed to help for 18-24 year olds.   There has been little debate on the reasons for this slow start, but the Youth Contract was promoted at a time of high profile reported cases of alleged abuse of welfare to work schemes by a few providers.  Undoubtedly this could have affected some employer’s willingness to participate.  &#xa0;Apprenticeships: definitions and numbers &#xa0;Currently much of the emphasis (the hortatory activity) is focused on apprenticeships the new ‘silver bullet’ of skills training.  The potential contribution from apprenticeships is considerable: a sustained expansion of well-structured apprenticeship programmes would make a thoroughly worthwhile contribution to the national scene. However, discussions are characterised by both an underestimation of the extent of shift required to make apprenticeships effective and an overestimation of the extent of their potential contribution. They will only be effective as part of a well-considered and well-resourced wider framework for skills development in the UK. Given the present approach, we can anticipate another policy failure. &#xa0;The interest of young people in apprenticeships is beyond dispute, but apprenticeship schemes are shamelessly oversold. The National Apprenticeship Service has reported that, for the year 2012, there were 1,127,000 apprenticeship applications submitted online for 106,510 places. There is no official statement as to whether this is a good thing (indicating the popularity of the idea) or a bad thing (young people desperate to get opportunities).  However hortatory campaigning on apprenticeships produces a greater demand for places rather than an increase in supply.  Applications for a well-structured apprenticeship programme exceed the number of places by a ratio of ten to one.  More young people end up disappointed.&#xa0;Further, although apprenticeships are a ‘good thing’, they are not necessarily what they appear to be. &#xa0;In November 2012 the Entrepreneur Doug Richard presented his Richard Review on apprenticeships. Building on a recent Business and Innovation Select Committee report, he effectively destroyed the notion that apprenticeships are the easy solution to the problem of worklessness.  His first recommendation was that apprenticeships should be redefined: “There has been a drift towards calling many things apprenticeships which, in fact, are not… not all instances of training on a job are apprenticeships. Apprenticeships require a new job role, a role that is new to the individual and requires them to learn a substantial amount before they can do that job effectively. An apprenticeship without a job is a form of vocational training. An apprenticeship in an old job is on-the-job training. There must be a job and the job role must be new”.  &#xa0;After extended deliberation the Government has finally published its response to the Richard Review.  This took the form of an implementation plan published on 28th October 2013.  The purpose of an apprenticeship was defined as “to train those aged 16 and above to achieve the Apprenticeship standard as set by employers to enable them to perform a skilled role effectively”. The main effect of the implementation plan will be to allow, indeed encourage, employers to describe almost any training scheme as an ‘apprenticeship’.  The precision demanded by the Richard Review has been rejected; the term apprentice has now irrevocably lost its traditional meaning.  It will longer describe an arrangement where a young person enters into a formal agreement and spends time working under experienced supervisors to acquired transferrable skills.  The popular conception of an apprenticeship is an intensive and extended vocational training that provides career opportunities for the less academically gifted.  Today’s apprenticeships are a framework for work-based learning, used as the basis for paying training providers. &#xa0;By formulating its new policy in these terms all prospect of creating a vocational pathway of equal currency to the educational one has been abandoned. An inevitable conclusion is that there will now be a huge emphasis on producing and promoting numbers of apprenticeship places however loosely defined. &#xa0;Perhaps the saddest reflection on the current training and skills debate is that the Government’s October 2013 implementation plan has attracted so little public attention or political debate.  In practice endorsing routine training could prove to be one of the most profound changes in skills policy for a decade.  It has neither appeared in the news nor been featured in the more serious newspapers.  In this complex and nuanced area, with continuing changing definitions, interest fatigue as well as initiative fatigue is evident.  &#xa0;An alternative approach

[[[&#xa0;]]]The dominant problem has been defined above as the need to reduce the 20% unemployment rate for 16-24 years olds and it has been argued that ‘employability skills’ are best (and in some cases only) learned in the workplace.  If this is accepted the stark truth is that the current cocktail of policies will not be effective.  More radical thinking is need and a new approach required.  Here I draw on more detailed analysis and arguments presented in my TJ (Training Journal) White Paper Training and skills in crisis. The approach proposed has four key elements: a change in the Companies Act; a new role for the UK Commission for Employment and Skills (UKCES); a key place in co-ordination and delivery for local authorities; development of an agreed charter to protect young job seekers.  Each of these four is considered in turn below.&#xa0;A change in the Companies Act &#xa0;The argument presented more fully in the TJ White Paper is that larger employers should accept obligations for skills development. It is only within this framework that initiatives will receive appropriate and consistent support. What is proposed therefore is that corporate law, and in particular the Companies Act, should be reviewed to introduce more specific obligations for workforce development, including obligations that reflect wider societal needs.&#xa0;Such a recommendation would necessarily involve the introduction of new reporting arrangements. There will, of course, be considerable objections but it is now time to review such radical options. Before siren voices are raised, it should be noted that such a revision has taken place in the UK in the last decade – but that it passed almost unnoticed.&#xa0;As is well known, the Companies Act is the primary source of UK company law and, at its simplest, sets the framework for the objective of increasing member (shareholder) value. The Companies Act 2006 offered the first major legislative update since 1985. Far and away the greatest controversy concerned Section 172 (1), which widened the responsibilities of directors and required them to act in a way that “would be most likely to promote the success of the company for the benefit of its members as a whole”, and in doing so have regard (amongst other matters) to:&#xa0;(a) the likely consequences of any decision in the long term(b) the interests of the company's employees(c) the need to foster the company's business relationships with suppliers, customers and others(d) the impact of the company's operations on the community and the environment(e) the desirability of the company maintaining a reputation for high standards of business conduct, and(f) the need to act fairly as between members of the company.”&#xa0;Most of the debate when the new Act was introduced concentrated on corporate social responsibility – the green agenda (sub-clause d). There was little discussion on the human resource management and development implications in sub-clause b.&#xa0;While this was taking place, the human resource profession was engaged in a parallel discussion with government on statutory requirements to report on what could be called ‘people measures’. This was, like so many topics in the area, a complex and carefully nuanced subject and is discussed in detail in a recent book by Andrew Mayo, a professor at Middlesex University Business School. His stark conclusion is that such initiatives ‘seem to have petered out’. A taskforce was set up by the then Department of Trade and Industry in 2003; this reported to government (the Kingsmill Report). However, the recommendations were never incorporated into a formal Operating and Financial Review in legislation.   The Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development has recently launched a joint project, with other professional bodies, Valuing your talent, which may well offer some perspectives in this area&#xa0;A redefined role for UKCES&#xa0;The UK Commission for Employment and Skills was created in 2008 as a publicly funded, industry led organisation providing strategic leadership on skills and employment issues in the UK. It is the central voice on skills policy in the country. The quality of its analysis is excellent; its reports are comprehensive, well written and concentrate on important, current issues; staff are capable and committed. Inevitably, the UKCES is stronger on diagnosis and analysis than it is on prescription. Unfortunately, the organisation appears to have positioned itself as a firm advocate of the latest scheme, whatever its merits; objectivity departs in a flurry of over-promotion and over-selling.&#xa0;Apprenticeships offer a good example. There is an evident need to adopt a critical review of the progress of this initiative: to offer a serious review of the balance between numbers and quality; to monitor potential abuse from private sector providers who focus on numbers alone. The role of the UKCES needs to change so it can undertake such reviews.&#xa0;A good model of what is required is the role played by the Office of Budget Responsibility. This body was created in 2010 to provide independent and authoritative analysis of the UK’s public finances. It is one of a growing number of official independent fiscal watchdogs around the world. It produces forecasts, judges progress towards targets, assesses the long-term sustainability of public finances and scrutinises the costing of budget measures.&#xa0;The case for independent scrutiny of skills training and welfare-to-work initiatives is powerful. The formulation and promotion of initiatives is a political activity that should be undertaken by the government of the day, for which it alone should be accountable. &#xa0;Devolution of responsibility to Local Government

[[[&#xa0;]]]The work of the Local Government Association (LGA) expressed through its Hidden Talents research programme was commended earlier in this document.  In February 2013 the LGA produced a report in this series in which it argued that a local approach to tackling long-term youth unemployment could see the number of young people out of work cut by 20 per cent in three years .  The report argued that personalised local approaches are most effective in reducing the number of young people out of work and training, but that national funding, performance and procurement systems driven by Whitehall undermine such schemes. The analysis presented of current efforts to tackle youth unemployment identified an overly complicated system, with 33 different national schemes that span 13 different age boundaries at a cost of £15bn a year..  &#xa0;The report argued that councils and their partners will be better able to spot and offer early help to young people struggling at school, train young people in skills to take local jobs in local labour markets, help improve the performance of the Work Programme for hardest-to-reach young people, and target job subsidies to local businesses offering the best opportunities for young people.&#xa0;This report makes eminent sense. If there is one theme running throughout this paper it is that a proliferation of schemes causes confusion. Competing schemes, however well meant, do not assist and enhanced and empowered local government could play the central role in coordinating and promoting the response to youth unemployment.  &#xa0;A charter to protect young job-seekers&#xa0;The existence of a large pool of young unemployed people means that the balance of power in the labour market has moved firmly towards the employer and away from the employee.  There has, for example, been a focus on zero hour contracts where the employee is committed by contract but promised no regular hours of work.  A recent survey undertaken by the CIPD suggested that more than a million British workers could be employed on this basis; such contracts are far more prevalent than had been thought.   &#xa0;There have been well-substantiated evidence of welfare to work schemes. A prominent incident concerned the use of unpaid stewards at the Diamond Jubilee celebrations. A newspaper reported that 30 ‘customers’ of the government’s work programme were given training placements with Close Protection UK and promised paid work at the Olympics – but for their work at the jubilee celebrations they were paid nothing. Having arrived in the capital on Sunday morning, all of them were told to sleep under London Bridge .  In September 2013 the FE (Further Education) magazine uncovered an advertisement on the National apprenticeship Service (NAS) website which required trainees to work for a ‘maximum of 39 hours a week’ unpaid.  The advertisement, which had been placed by a well-known automotive parts and spares group, was immediately withdrawn. The following month FE News identified ‘hundreds of employers’ advertising jobs on the NAS website at below the legally binding minimum wage.&#xa0;Such incidents represent only a small proportion of the whole.  However there is a strong case for some sort of protection and the development of a charter is proposed.  One of the Sub-Committee’s questions, which was not addressed at the oral session, was: “Do you think that young people (aged 15-24), youth groups and their representatives are consulted to a satisfactory degree…” Whatever the views on the broader question, the development of a charter is an area where young people could helpfully and usefully be engaged. &#xa0;Concluding comments&#xa0;The UK Government’s lack of enthusiasm for the idea of the European Youth Guarantee has been noted.  To what extent this reflects underlying Euro-scepticism and to what extent this reflects unease over the approach adopted is unclear.  Putting forward only the Youth Contract, one of the least successful of the recent plethora of initiatives, as the mechanism for satisfying the EU recommendation is difficult to understand.&#xa0;All this is unfortunate.  The European Youth Guarantee should be seen as an opportunity not an imposition.  There is almost universal agreement on the chronic nature of the problem of youth unemployment; it is hard to see how the current policy framework, with its uncertain positioning and over-promotion of apprenticeships, will deliver a sustained improvement.  The request that all member states should present detailed plans on the design and implementation of Youth Guarantee schemes could offer a valuable opportunity for developing and sharing good practice and for honest reporting in this most difficult area.&#xa0;11 November 2013&#xa0; Local Government Association Hidden talents: national programmes for young people, 2013, p.6 Ibid p.3 Crowley L, Jones K, Cominetti N, Gulliford J International Lessons: Youth unemployment in the global context, The Work Foundation (2013) Start-rite boss forecast shift from the Far East, EDP (Eastern Daily Press) Business News 30th October, 2013 Simms, M., Hopkins, B., and Gamwell, S., Sustainable Employment

[[[:]]]

[[[ ]]]Strategies to Tackle Youth Unemployment, 2013, p. 37 (unpublished paper). BIS FE &amp; Skills Newsletter Issue no. 53 February 2103.  The newsletter is no longer published. Local Government Association, Hidden Talents: national programmes for young people, 2013 p.15 House of Commons Library Youth Contract Standard Note SN/6387 July 2013 Training Journal (TJ) White Paper Training and skills in crisis - a critique and some recommendations, 2013. On-line version only available at: http://www.trainingjournal.com/whitepapers/&#xa0; Mayo A Human Resources or Human Capital? Managing People as Assets, Gower (2012) Local Government Association Hidden Talents II: Re-engaging young people, the local offer, (2013) Local Government Association, Hidden Talents: national programmes for young people, 2013 p.15 “Zero hours contracts more widespread than thought”, CIPD Press Release 5th August 2013 “Back to the workhouse” The Guardian 8 June 2012