&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Malcolm McBain [FBB0100]]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;The inquiry into the future of the BBC is of profound importance to all thinking tax payers. However, BBC staff as commentators of events are not more important than legislators. Legislators have to take responsibility for their actions. BBC staff should not therefore be paid at grossly higher rates than legislators or civil servants. It is a scandal that the BBC is able to persist in concealing the main facts about their pay scales from the public which pays for them through taxation.&#xa0;Many other scandals have come to light in recent years but it seems to me that the power to form and guide public opinion, which the BBC possesses in abundance, may be being abused. It might, for example, be being used, by restricting publicity about it, to downgrade the importance of this inquiry into the future of the Corporation. The BBC is extremely skilled in the task of guiding public opinion. This tendency needs to be brought under public control if some acceptable formula for this can be devised.&#xa0;The method of choosing public figures to express views on radio and television about current questions of public interest is not clear. I suspect that people expressing views critical of the BBC may find themselves overlooked when choices are made about whom to invite onto political programmes of public interest. If so, it is improper use of public funds by a supposedly impartial publicly funded corporation.&#xa0;I am particularly incensed by the way the BBC has glossed over the question of the excessive pay and allowances paid to senior staff of the Corporation. It seems clear that the BBC employs specialist advisers to recommend the taking of measures to evade or reduce income taxes by staff or favoured contributors.  If more modest emoluments are recommended by Parliament, the BBC will need to be examined critically to ensure it does not devise further crafty ways of finessing any reductions that may be attempted by Parliament or the Government in future. The Committee needs to be particularly alert to this and to the ability of the BBC to deny or curtail the publicity it gives to its critics.&#xa0;The scope of the BBC to enlarge its activities beyond the key duty of spreading factual and truthful information about Britain and the world should be considerably reduced, Too many news bulletins are taken up with idle chatter and speculation about future events.  The “Today” programme, for example, too frequently tells us what is going to be announced later that day before it has happened.  There are too many instances of vulgarity, bad language, gratuitous sexual scenes, violence etc in entertainment programmes.  There seems to be a definite attempt by the BBC to dumb down a population that seems to have been cowed into accepting a general lowering of moral standards.&#xa0;November 2013&#xa0;