&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Rev Neil ]]]

[[[McNicholas]]]

[[[ [FBB0101]]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;I continue to be incensed by the arrogance of those responsible for the day-to-day running of the BBC whether its Director or (and here's a misnomer if ever there was one) the BBC Trust!&#xa0;To begin with the concept of a broadcaster entirely supported by compulsory contributions from the licence fee is truly an anachronism. I'm just amazed that none of the commercial broadcasters have brought a charge of discrimination against the BBC, and/or the Government of the day, given that they are forced to compete in the commercial marketplace but their major competitor, the BBC, is spoon-fed from the licence fee and doesn't have to compete at all.&#xa0;But if the Beeb continues to justify its existence based on its broadcasting history, then how come it manages to avoid the founding principles still writ large in the lobby of Broadcasting House: This Temple of the Arts and Muses is dedicated to Almighty God. It is (the governors') prayer that good seed sown may bring forth a good harvest, that all things hostile to peace or purity may be banished from this house. The sound you hear is Lord Reith turning in his grave.&#xa0;Almost without exception the BBC's broadcasting values expressed in that statement have long-since been abandoned and before I get into the substance of my letter I would cite an example from a newscast yesterday that proves my point. The news reader, interviewing an invited guest, began his question with: "How the hell do we as a nation... "There is absolutely no need for such coarseness - no excuse for language of that sort (again it keeps Lord Reith gyrating - though my concern, as a priest, is for the offence offered to another, higher, Lord).&#xa0;I find myself constantly complaining to the BBC about the "strong language", ie. obscenities, included in its (admittedly post 9pm) programming, complaints they totally ignore - just as for decades they ignored the late Mary Whitehouse and her valiant but largely fruitless efforts to get them to clean up their act. If the BBC bothers to respond to complaints at all, it is the usual waste-of-space justification (as they see it) that what individuals find offensive varies widely. That may be true, but the very fact that they warn people in advance of "strong language" content is anadmission that they know it is offensive. There is absolutely no justification for broadcasting deliberately offensive material into people's homes. We do not pay a licence fee to find we have to switch our televisions off. “That's how live is” they will say, well maybe, but if I wanted to see how life is I can sit on my doorstep for free.&#xa0;But given the arrogance that characterises the Beeb's typical response to complaints received,  it clearly has no intention whatsoever of not broadcasting obscene language, it and all other broadcasters should be made to at least include a printed warning next to a programme in the various TV magazines and programme listings (as they do for the sex/violence/language content of films) so people know what to expect rather than wasting an entire evening waiting to watch a programme that looks interesting only to be informed of the language content immediately before it is due to begin and having, if they so choose, to switch off or switch channels. I have appealed over and over for such a consideration, but they don't have any consideration – they don't have to - they get paid for what they do regardless - they don't have to justify their existence or the standard of the work they carry out for the money we pay them and that's the basic problem.&#xa0;They are also reluctant to warn people in advance, I feel, because they are afraid of losing viewers. If someone has sat there all evening only to be told at the last moment about programme content, it is the Beeb's hope they will cut their losses and stick with it -I won't - ever. But isn't that totally dishonest? - trying to trick people into watching their programmes?&#xa0;The various scandals that have surfaced within the BBC recently, not to mention the scandal also of the obscene salaries being paid to executives and so-called "talent" (star presenters) is a reflection of the arrogance that seems to be rife within the Corporation. They sit there in their ivory towers safe in the knowledge that they don't have to justify their "cloud cuckoo land" existence, a luxury no other company or business could hope to enjoy. The Beeb displays a breath-taking arrogance verging on ignorance, and a total disregard for the public who is paying the bills, in every aspect of its operation. I suspect that if some of its executives had to compete in the real world they would quickly find themselves at the nearest Job Centre where some of them rightly belong.&#xa0;What the BBC should be made to do in this day and age is either operate on a commercial basis like its competitors, or follow the example of PBS in the States and have annual fund-raising drives based on a display of the programming it hopes to produce. If people like what they see they pledge a voluntary donation to help pay for it, and if they don't then the Beeb would have to cut its cloth accordingly - at least it would have to justify its existence. On that basis alone, if it were in my power, I would close it down tomorrow until it did.&#xa0;Finally, in the response I received to my most recent complaint about "strong language" it was clear that the Beeb keeps a list of people like me who they hear from repeatedly. Don't you think that's a bit 1984ish? My name is on a list. I don't consider myself to be a chronic BBC complainant so much as a principled viewer - like Mary Whitehouse was - and of course the Beeb considered (and treated) her as a crank too. We cranks must stick together if we are to have any hope of affecting change for the better - that and my hope that your Committee can bring some long overdue influence to bear in that regard.&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0; And as a recent correspondent in the Yorkshire Post pointed out, you only have to watch Points of View to see how they respond to complaints.