Written evidence from the Legal Ombudsman [PHSO055]&#xa0;&#xa0;Thank you for your invitation to submit written evidence to the inquiry, following my appearance before you on the 10 December. &#xa0;Consumers and businesses currently must negotiate a complex complaints maze of which Ombudsmen are on important facet. Your inquiry and the European Union directive on alternative dispute resolution (ADR) provide an opportunity to look at the landscape and help put steps in place to aid simplification.&#xa0;In my evidence I discussed the crucial role of governance in ensuring ongoing confidence (of consumers, business, regulators and Government) in the ability of Ombudsmen to remain independent and make robust, impartial decisions, sometimes in complex or contentious circumstances. The model that is currently in place at the Legal Ombudsman, among other schemes, was developed using the experience and insight from other schemes and works well. The Office for Legal Complaints (OLC), the board of the Legal Ombudsman, is charged with administering an effective scheme, and scrutines the managerial aspects of the work of the scheme in its entirety.  It also acts as a useful buffer, protecting the independence of the Ombudsman in relation to the decisions taken, in part due to the fact that the OLC, including the Chair, has no decision making powers in relation to individual cases. This level of separation is crucial for the independence and effectiveness of the Ombudsman role.&#xa0;At the committee I also spoke about sharing good practice the Legal Ombudsman shares our practice and seeks to learn from our fellow Ombudsman schemes via formal and informal means. Formally, we play a full role in facilitating and participating in the groups run by the Ombudsman Association looking at issues such as IT and equalities. Informally, we have regular meetings with staff from the Financial Ombudsman and Local Government Ombudsman, for example, to share ideas.  That said, these links could be stronger and we find that not all Ombudsman schemes are committed to open information sharing.&#xa0;We continued a discussion on developing a single access point via an online portal, for example. We are strong supporters of the idea of a single access point for all consumers to raise a complaint.  Our research has shown high levels of popular confusion about what services are covered by what Ombudsman schemes, with the result that current systems are expensive and inefficient for providers, and ineffective for would-be complainants.  We would be very eager to participate in any new single portal for complaints; indeed, we have been discussing such an idea with some of our peers for some time.  In the past this idea has been dogged by practical issues – the EU ADR Directive provides an opportunity to recognise the importance of an online presence (not least due to the burgeoning marketplace for online sales of both good and services) and also presents an opportunity for Government to take a leading role in effectively banging heads together and overcoming any institutional inertia that might prevent such innovation occurring.   It would also have the benefit of assisting many schemes to reduce their overall costs by sharing infrastructure and minimising duplication – this has to be good for both consumers and businesses who fund these schemes. &#xa0;The Directive requires all ADR schemes to be transparent about their performance and the knowledge which they have accumulated.  In our experience, most Ombudsman schemes already exhibit this transparency, which is one of the key principles endorsed by the Ombudsman Association.  The impact of the Directive may well be on the practice of non-Ombudsman ADR providers, which are currently far less open about their practice.  This would be extremely useful.&#xa0;With the ADR Directive there is an opportunity to remodel system – the Directive does not require more than that a member state puts in place a system of ADR for all goods and services.  However, it does not require that all providers sign up to that system; participation is voluntary.  On this basis, therefore, Government could leave the existing framework largely untouched, other than creating a residuary body to deal with complaints not falling within the scope of any of the existing schemes.  However, given the increasingly complex and inefficient landscape of ADR provision in the UK, with the sorts of gaps and overlaps highlighted in your letter, simply creating a residuary body to, for example, deal with complaints about unregulated legal services (which fall outside the Legal Ombudsman’s existing jurisdiction) would risk adding to consumer and business confusion.  Given that the implementation of the Directive has to take account of the existing landscape, therefore, there is a need for Government to examine the shape of that landscape before taking a decision that what seems the least cost implementation model is appropriate.  Our reading of the current complaints landscape and changing marketplace is that this might be a short term view, adding complexity and cost in the long term as consumers and businesses bear the burden of an incoherent and unintelligible system.&#xa0;We believe that the provision of ADR across all sectors should be rationalised and simplified, just as you are considering in relation to public services.  We also consider that any  new arrangements for provision of ADR by Ombudsmen and others should be a mixed market; Ombudsman schemes are not necessary for a large number of disputes and disputes can be successfully resolved by a range of other mechanisms.  However, it will be vital to ensure that consumers are not misled by providers claiming to be providing redress but relying on inadequate or fraudulent schemes.  Since the Directive lays down clear and adequate quality standards for ADR schemes, we would suggest that the Government acts to ensure that schemes which do operate under the Directive are given official status and branded in such a way as to make it clear to the consumer that they can be trusted.  Non-compliant providers should not be allowed to advertise as though they were part of the official scheme.&#xa0;There is a recurring theme here of the need for simplification and increased effectiveness.  Developing a single public services Ombudsman may also further assist this and would benefit consumers, so long as that process delivers increased efficiency and reduced costs.  To that extent, therefore, we support the notion of a single public services Ombudsman.  However, given the increasing blurring of private and public service provision (with increased use of private health providers and care homes, for example), we are doubtful if the formal distinction between public and private services Ombudsman will continue to be wholly useful.&#xa0;It will be important to ensure non-proliferation of schemes -  we do not consider that there is an optimal number of schemes.  The number of schemes which should be aimed for should be determined by the principles of maximising efficiency, minimising cost, providing simplicity for consumers (and businesses), and ensuring that those administering the schemes have a thorough understanding of the goods or services being provided.  In our judgement, these principles push towards a limited number of broadly-based schemes, each containing within it access to specialist expertise, operating within an agreed framework and offering a seamless route of access for complainants.  Again, the mechanism for achieving this would include limiting the number of schemes endorsed by Government, with cost and efficiency being potentially guaranteed via some sort of competitive tender process. Ombudsman schemes are able to offer a full spectrum of ADR – from mediation through to Ombudsman decisions.  &#xa0;Thank you for the opportiunity to appear before the committee and to submit this further written evidence, I look forward to reading the committee’s report.&#xa0;20 December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;Page 2 of 4&#xa0;&#xa0;