&#xa0;It would depend whether the constitution granted the judiciary/ Supreme/ Constitutional Court the power to review provisions in Acts of Parliament for constitutionality, and if it did, what powers it granted the judiciary by way of remedy. Constitutionality, in this context, could refer to the substance/content of a law and/or to whether the correct procedure had been followed in Parliament before it was passed – e.g. 2/3 majorities in both Houses, etc.

[[[Strike down powers]]]For instance, if the judiciary had the right to strike down a provision in an Act of Parliament which they found to be incompatible with the Constitution, this would expose the judges to political pressure and criticism, not only from politicians but also often from the press and sections of the public. Much would depend upon the culture that would develop in the UK, especially among politicians,  under a codified Constitution. In the USA, as is well known, the Supreme Court is considered to be party political. In Germany the Bundesverfassungsgericht is highly respected and regarded as neutral; this is also true of top courts in, e.g. South Africa, Israel.  It would be most undesirable if arrangements under a codified constitution were to undermine the respect in which the judiciary, especially the Supreme Court, is held by putting them in a position to strike down ‘unconstitutional’ provisions.

[[[Disapplication powers]]]A variation on the ‘strike down’ power would be a power under the Constitution for courts to disapply a provision that was found to be incompatible with the Constitution in the particular case, and applying the Constitution itself directly rather than the ‘unconstitutional’ provision in an Act, but without making the provision legally invalid for the future and for other litigants. This device puts the responsibility for removing ‘unconstitutional’ laws from the statute book on government and Parliament (‘remedial orders’ like those under the HRA could be provided for) rather than on the courts, while at the same time providing the claimant with a remedy. This is the approach adopted in the Nordic countries and many civil law jurisdictions: the plaintiff is granted a remedy in the case (unlike the position with declarations of incompatibility under the Human Rights Acts, where the plaintiff remains subject to the law despite its breach of the ECHR) but the law remains valid on the statute book until it is repealed or amended by the executive/ legislature. 

[[[Declarations of incompatibility]]]If a British Supreme Court were given express power in the Constitution to make ‘declarations of (constitutional) incompatibility’ (as judges in New Zealand have assumed in relation to their BoRA) this would put the issue back in the court of politicians and minimise conflict between judges and politicians. 

[[[Placing the responsibility]]]

[[[ for constitutionality]]]

[[[ on politicians]]]If the courts’ powers were limited to disapplication or declaration of constitutional incompatibility, it would be for the government to decide whether to correct the constitutional incompatibility by amending the offending statutory provision, or to let the incompatibility stand, or to secure the amendment of the written Constitution. The effectiveness of such an arrangement in deterring governments from promoting and Parliament from passing ‘unconstitutional’ laws would depend on the regulation of processes and procedures in the development and passing of bills before they receive royal assent. As long as there were – as there are now – strong pressures on government and departments not to propose ‘uncconstitutional’ measures, it would be very rare for such measures to reach the statute book. It is worth noting the arrangements currently in place to deter the inclusion of provisions in bills, regulations etc that breach EU law, the ECHR and other international obligations of the UK. Such arrangements could form part of the preventative machinery where the passage of ‘unconstitutional’ laws might be being considered by government. Current arrangements include: And, once a bill or draft bill is published by, the House of Lords Constitution Committee, the Joint Committee on Human Rights, the EU Committees in both Houses and other select committees scrutinise the proposals and report on any problems of a ‘constitutional’ nature. (My chapter on Parliament and the Courts explores these arrangements.) 

[[[Would a new, non-judicial, body be needed to prevent/deter unconstitutional law-making?]]]It may be that a new, statutory, independent and expert, Scrutiny Commission should be created under a codified constitution; it could be tasked with scrutinising bills and draft bills for such issues. The influence of such a body in deterring unconstitutional law making would depend upon the balance between party politics and constitutionalism in the cultures in the governing party or parties, and in Parliament, and whether the Scrutiny Commission had the power to delay the progress made by a bill in Parliament in order to induce government to respond to its reports and concerns. 

[[[Comparisons with other countries]]]

[[[ lacking judicial strike down]]]

[[[The Netherlands]]]By way of comparison with the position in other well-functioning Western liberal democracies, Article 120 of the Constitution of the Netherlands forbids judicial striking down/disapplication of provisions in Acts for incompatibility with the Constitution. Instead there is an extra-parliamentary non-partisan body in the Netherlands, the Council of State, which scrutinises bills before they are passed and reports to Parliament if they find them to be defective e.g. as being unconstitutional. Their reports are commonly accepted. (On the other hand, unlike the UK, the NL is a monist state, which means that international instruments such as the ECHR are directly effective and enforceable in their courts. So much of what might be ‘unconstitutional’ in the NL can be challenged in court by litigants on the ground that it is incompatible with international instruments, and not by challenging their constitutionality in court.)

[[[Finland]]]The courts in Finland had no power to strike down ‘unconstitutional’ legislation until the adoption of a new Constitution in 2000. Article 106 provides ‘If in a matter being tried by a court, the application of an Act would be in evident conflict with the Constitution, the court of law shall give primacy to the provision in the Constitution’. However, ‘evident conflict’ has been very narrowly construed by the courts, and there have only been some ten cases in which the courts have exercised the power to give primacy to the Constitution over an Act. Finland relies heavily on intra-parliamentary scrutiny of bills for constitutionality before they are enacted. Their uni-cameral Parliament has a highly respected Constitutional Law Committee consisting of members of the chamber, which includes some eminent lawyers. They scrutiinise bills for compatibility with the constitution, they call experts to give evidence to them, they operate in a non-party political way, and they report to Parliament. Their reports are respected by government, which will normally amend the provisions that the Committee has found to be unconstitutional before the bill is passed. So it is rare in Finland for bills to be passed with unconstitutional provisions in them, unless they are passed by a special procedure that is the same as that for constitutional amendments. In such a case they are legally valid acts despite being incompatible with the Constitution. (They are called Acts of Exception; it has been rare for such bills to be passed in the last decade or so. They can be repealed by simple majorities, just as ‘ordinary’ bills can be.) Given the adversarial  nature of politics in the House of Commons, continued reliance in the UK on intra-parliamentary scrutiny, even on the Finnish model, would only work in the second chamber, and then only if the second chamber were not politically adversarial. 

[[[Sweden]]]In Sweden there is only very limited strike down power in the courts, and instead the Parliament’s Constitutional Committee advises on the constitutionality of bills before they are enacted.

[[[France]]]Since 2008 the French conseil constitutionnel has power to refuse to give effect to provisions in Acts that are contrary to the Constitution. However, until 2008 the conseil constitutionnel’s power was limited to deciding, before a projet de loi/bill  was promulgated, whether it was contrary to the Constitution. If it so decided, the projet de loi would not be promulgated. The reason for the pre-2008 position was that when the Fifth Republic was formed in 1946 it was considered important to protect the executive from an over-powerful Parliament and the courts. In recent years that has no longer been the case and the current concern is to protect citizens against the state.In summary, some Northern European countries with evolved constitutions (as the UK has) have other ways of securing constitutionality than by use of Supreme or Constitutional Courts with strike down powers along German or USA lines. It would depend who was in charge of drafting a Constitution. If an independent body were in charge of the exercise, e.g a Royal Commission, they would be expected to hold seminars with judges (and other ‘stakeholders’) on the issues early on, and to go out to consultation before and after producing a draft Constitution. Heads of judiciaries  (UK, English, Scottish and Northern Ireland) and judges at various levels (the Supreme Court, in England the Court of Appeal, High Court, County Court, Crown Court, magistrates and Tribunals and their equivalents in Scotland and Northern Ireland) would be invited to comment. No doubt many practitioners and academics, and representative bodies like the Inns of Court, the Bar Council, and the Law Society (and their equivalents in Scotland and NI) would also make representations on these issues.See my responses to question 1 &#xa0;If the codified constitution explicitly bound the UK and the UK Parliament not to breach the provisions of the European Court of Human Rights (as the devolution Acts bind the devolved bodies) and authorised the Supreme Court or other courts to strike down such laws, then the doctrine of sovereignty would have holes in it.&#xa0;If in addition our courts had the power to strike down a provision in an Act of Parliament on grounds of unconstitutionality, this would alter fundamentally the concept of Parliament as ‘sovereign’. Some would interpret this as a shift from parliamentary sovereignty to constitutional supremacy. (This shift is taking place in Israel.)&#xa0;If on the other hand the codified constitution authorised the courts to make declarations as to the constitutionality or compliance with the ECHR of provisions in Acts, this would not breach the doctrine of supremacy. Politicians might be annoyed but the remedy would be in their hands – amendment of the Constitution or a provision in an Act of Parliament.&#xa0;The position is already that our courts will give direct effect to European laws, and will prefer EU laws to UK laws where there is incompatibility. This is required by EU law and is authorised by the ECA 1972.&#xa0;It is unusual in common law systems of former dominions for there to be pre-promulgation reference procedures. Such a power does exist in Canada in certain circumstances (e.g. in relation to reform of the Senate): the problem in Canada is that there are seven different procedures for amending the constitutional text so disputes can arise over which procedure is appropriate when amendment is being considered. Reference procedures do exist in relation to devolution to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.Many other constitutions provide for such pre-promulgation references. The Finnish President may refer a bill to the Supreme Court and Supreme Administrative Court for opinions on their constitutional compatibility before promulgation. The Swedish Supreme Court and Supreme Administrative Court may be asked for their opinions on the constitutional compatibility of bills – including whether the correct legislative or amendment procedures are being followed. This works well in those countries.It could and should be part of the Supreme Court. There would not be sufficient work for it to be a separate court (unless the same judges were in both the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court). The legitimacy of a constitutional court in the UK would be undermined if appointments were political. Many other top courts in liberal democracies have jurisdiction in relation to both constitutional and other, e.g. private law, cases.See parts of my answers to questions above.The top courts in many such countries have been quite inventive in ‘discovering’ constitutional principles which, though not explicit in the text of the Constitution are nevertheless implicit. For instance:In fact it may be a characteristic of top courts in countries with written (and uncodified – see New Zealand and Israel) constitutions to develop constitutional principles outside their constitutional texts, whether in Constitutions or important Acts having constitutional significance.16 December 2013&#xa0;&#xa0;