&#xa0;

[[[Further written evidence from Chris Hobbs [CST0043]]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]Please note this is my second evidence submission to the Public Administration Select Committee which I have compiled in relation to the further hearing in relation to alleged crime figure manipulation by police. I understand that this hearing will be held on the 8th of January 2014 during which evidence will be heard from Stephen Greenhalgh, Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, Tom Winsor and Olivia Pinkney.  I hope this submission will be available to PASC members before the hearing as it anticipates some of the assertions that will be made by those appearing before it and provides additional disturbing information obtained from serving front line officers.As the hearing progresses there will be reassurances from the Met representatives that will doubtless involve phrases which will include the words ‘robust’, ‘rigorous, ‘integrity’ and ‘crime registrar.’ Stephen Greenhalgh will probably repeat the assertion that his own auditors will be ‘looking at the books’ to determine that the recording of crime is accurate. Rank and file officers know only too well that the ‘devil lies in the detail’ and that only by examining the minutiae in the body of the crime reports, will it be possible to detect dubious crime recording. This will vary from borough to borough within the Met and quite possible from supervisor to supervisor. Those, such as outside auditors, not familiar with police parlance, procedures and the law will not be able to detect such nuances.Those in the best position to articulate dubious practices are front line rank and file officers who take reports from the public. Most will now not even attempt to ‘buck the system’ and will simply record the entry as they know the crime managers will wish it to be recorded. Thus robbery will frequently be recorded as theft person unless the circumstances make it impracticable to do so. This would be the case in the event of serious injury or clear evidence of a weapon, such as a knife, being used. The most recent Met staff satisfaction survey, as the Commissioner would have to agree, shows an alarming lack of confidence by rank and file officers in Met ACPO ranked management. The figures would probably be worse were it not for the fact that many officers do not trust the ‘guaranteed anonymity’ of such surveys. Similar results can be seen in respect of many other UK forces.Even allowing for doubts by officers in relation to anonymity, it would perhaps be an interesting exercise for the Met Commissioner or MOPAC to conduct an online independent survey amongst front line rank and file officers as to a) whether they believe crime figures are manipulated b) their ‘evidence’ for such a belief. Last year, whilst in a London pound shop, I became aware of a commotion and realised that a young male was complaining that his phone had been stolen by stealth. One of the two suspects had left the store with the phone. The young male attempted to detain the other and was punched in the face causing a visible bleeding wound. I saw the suspect flee the shop as I was telephoning police. I drove round in a police vehicle looking for the second suspect without success. I was informed by the officer that the matter would be recorded as a ‘theft and assault’ rather than the more serious robbery. I later checked the definition of robbery together with several ‘case stated’ hearings and there is no doubt that this incident comfortably comes within the robbery definition. Presumably this ‘theft and assault’ would be buried within the ‘theft other’ figures rather than amongst those carrying the ‘theft person’ definition. It is ‘theft person’ category however where front line officers allege many robbery offences are placed. As can be seen from Attachment 1, there were nearly 50,000 ‘theft person’ reports and given the different variations in policy amongst boroughs and individuals, these would have to be examined in depth to separate robbery offences from the genuine theft persons, i.e. ‘phone snatches’ and pick pocketing/’dipping’ offences, which is another strand of ‘theft person;’ that is of course where such thefts are not entered into ‘property lost in the street’ records. To a non police auditor, it may well be that placing crimes, such as the one I partially witnessed, into the lesser category, would be quite acceptable. Recently I spoke to two officers who have spent some years on a local plain clothes squad dealing with street robberies.  They were quite used to recording robberies as lesser offences but pointed out that when a suspect for a robbery offence, which would normally be reported as a theft person or theft and assault, was actually arrested at or near the scene, then the offence would be recorded as a robbery as it would show a more serious robbery clear up. The next piece of information from the officers stretched my credulity to the limit. The fact that one officer is a personal friend who joined the Met just weeks before me is the only reason why I feel confident to include it as fact. It would seem that if a suspect is arrested for a street robbery then not only is the individual robbed shown as the victim, but also included are his/her companions or other witnesses in close proximity to the incident, thus this would show as two, three, four robbery ‘clear ups’ as opposed to one. This would not apply where the suspect was not apprehended. The individual robbed would be shown as the only victim with the possibility that the robbery could be recorded as a theft person or theft assault.  Witnesses would not be included as victims. Sadly, such is the climate of fear within the Met that exists in relation to any officer who be considered a ‘whistleblower,’ I am unable to name even the borough where these officers perform duty in case this leads to their identification. Whilst ACPO ranked officers and PCC’s will officially ‘deplore’ any crime figure manipulation and whereas the Home office have ‘abolished’ targets, huge pressure exists on Met borough commanders of Chief Superintendent rank to reduce crime figures. Tales of ‘wire type’ grilling administered by certain known ACPO officers abound throughout the Met and are far too common to be dismissed as ‘Chinese whispers.’ Chief Superintendent’s have been reduced to tears and indeed removed from their posts for failing to bring those figures down. Bewildered officers at one west London borough came under the command of three Chief Superintendents during a period of several weeks.This inevitably leads to downward pressure by Chief Superintendents upon their police supervisory managers who themselves feel that it is incumbent upon them to reduce crime figures if they wish to remain in post and/or advance their careers.The question of ‘whistleblowing’ and indeed any conscientious form of dissent, as illustrated by the previous PASC hearing, is clearly linked to the manipulation of crime figures. The assertion in the Met’s recently issued code of conduct in respect of protection of whistleblowers has been greeted with derision by rank and file officers.I have absolutely no doubt that if the question of ‘whistleblowing’ was added to any crime figure manipulation survey, as described above, more that 90% of rank and file officers would state that they would not have any faith in the system other than in the most obvious cases (money being accepted from criminal elements in return for ‘favours’ or indeed money accepted from journalists). The key question is how crime figure manipulation can be identified and dealt with given the fact that dubious practises have continued for decades. Using  police officers or police staff as crime registrars, hiring independent auditors who are unfamiliar with the vagaries of police crime reporting  using police or PCC funds or even utilising HMIC staff again who in all probability will be equally unfamiliar with the above mentioned vagaries, will do little to inspire confidence.The answer perhaps lies with those former and current officers who have previously given evidence of crime figure manipulation and together with those of ACPO rank who use both overt and dubious furtive methods to discourage whistleblowers whilst publically stating the opposite.&#xa0;January 2014&#xa0;