&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[ADCS ]]]The Association of Directors of Children's Services (ADCS) values the opportunity to respond to the call for evidence by the Education Select Committee on the Ofsted Social Care Annual Report 2012 – 13.  ADCS is the professional association for directors of children's services and their senior management teams. Under the Children Act 2004, the DCS is the chief officer responsible for the discharge of local authority functions for children’s social care. The DCS provides a clear and unambiguous line of professional accountability for children’s services as well being professionally responsible for the leadership, strategy and effectiveness of local authority children’s services and, as such, has a particular interest in the publication of the Ofsted Social Care Annual Report. ADCS believes that inspection, by Ofsted, of the local authority, has the potential to be helpful if it supports improvement in outcomes for children and their families and our response is set in this context.2012 – 13 was the first year that the Ofsted Annual Report has been split into two separate publications, one encompassing social care exclusively and another, published in early December 2013, focusing predominantly on the education aspect of Ofsted’s remit. It is not clear what benefit this brings to the workforce or the public, but the publication of two reports separating the local authority’s work in respect of children’s social care from that of its role in quality assuring  school standards, does not reflect the co-dependencies that exist when improving outcomes for children and young people.ADCS welcomes Ofsted’s focus on improving standards in children’s social care. All directors of children’s services, whether their services have been judged by Ofsted to be ‘outstanding’ or ‘inadequate’, are committed to improving services for the children in their local area. On publication of the Ofsted Annual Report, Sir Michael Wilshaw called for “strong and stable leadership to bring about sustained improvement in the help, care and protection of our most vulnerable young people”, ADCS agrees with this laudable aim and acknowledges the crucial role of strong and stable leadership teams, not exclusively the director of children’s services but also the wider management team, in delivering good, sustainable services. Yet Ofsted's approach to inspection, namely the single word judgment, is not conducive to leadership stability. A judgment of inadequate after the inspection of local authority children’s services, and the subsequent instability this can cause, can be detrimental to the improvement journey of a local authority. In one local authority, the vacancy rate amongst children’s social workers increased from 4% to 40% after a judgment of “inadequate”. Other children’s services departments, such as Birmingham City Council, have publically stated the impact that staff vacancies has had when trying to improve their service. A move to narrative judgments, as opposed to a single word judgment, would allow local authorities to work with their local partners, including health, police and education, in a less punitive environment to form an action plan to  improve services in their local area. Helping, protecting and caring for vulnerable children, young people and their families is a complex multi agency business that is not eased by the febrile climate that children’s services leaders sometimes find themselves in during the immediate aftermath of an ‘inadequate’ inspection judgment.January 2014&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;