&#xa0;Written Evidence from the Police and Crime Commissioner for Cumbria [CST0055]Summary: This submission responds to the 2 areas of interest raised in the Chairman’s letter of 6th December. It covers how I, as Police and Crime Commissioner, gain assurance about the accuracy of crime figures in Cumbria and the range of methods I use to monitor performance.  As Police and Crime Commissioner, I am acutely aware of the importance of the public having confidence in the information provided to them about crime in their area. Accurate crime data is also vital for planning the best use of resources.  This is not unique to Cumbria and, indeed, this issue has attracted interest nationally. This is why I decided that it would only be appropriate to check on the quality and accuracy of data recording by Cumbria Constabulary. The approach has included using our internal audit function to carry out a check of data quality and continued monitoring of Constabulary work and action plans to ensure a high level of data recording accuracy following changes to the internal crime and incident recording checking function. There is an on-going programme of independent checks in place, both through use of audit and HMIC inspections, whose findings will inform my areas of focus with the Constabulary.  We know that official recorded crime figures only represent a proportion of the crime experienced by the public in Cumbria and we need to be clear for the public that we are talking about recorded crime. There are a variety of reasons why victims may choose not to report a crime to the police, however improving the victim’s experience and providing a range of pathways for reporting crime are priorities for me, to ensure that more victims come forward and can receive support if they require it. Indeed, increasing reporting of domestic abuse and hate crimes are priorities within my Police and Crime Plan and the measures used to monitor performance in these areas reflect this. &#xa0;My Police and Crime Plan, ‘Making Cumbria an Even Safer Place’ sets out my priorities for the Constabulary and it therefore forms the cornerstone of holding the Chief Constable to account for performance of his force. I have in place a number of performance measures, which include priority crime types, to enable me and, indeed the Police and Crime Panel and the public, to keep track of the Plan and crime levels in the county. My regular engagement with District Councils often focusses on the level of crime in their area and so this crime and other data also provides information of use to local Councils. These measures form part of a number of methods through which I monitor police performance. They include feedback from the public on quality of service, such as via my engagement events, correspondence and surveys. I also receive reports from the Constabulary at my Executive Board on other aspects of value for money, such as sickness, overtime costs and complaints and the Constabulary provides bi-monthly updates on priority themes in the Police and Crime Plan, such as road safety or use of out of court disposals. Internal audits allow me to gain assurance on the robustness of internal controls and data quality. Overall, this approach aims to provide and drive a balanced and rounded picture of performance without over-emphasis on meeting targets. As an issue of continued national interest, I would welcome further proposals nationally to continue to promote accuracy of crime data. I will also look forward to the findings of your inquiry.  January 2014

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;