&#xa0;

[[[Further Written evidence submitted by Monica Waud (LGO18)]]]&#xa0;

[[[Summary]]]The current procedures used by the Ombudsman do not ensure fairness and that reassurances provided in the evidence provided in the session on 2 December 2013 do not address the criticisms of the system made by me and others.  A further look at the soundness of the method of evidence gathering used by the Ombudsman and the availability of evidence to complainants is essential if the Ombudsman is to meet the test of fairness.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Evidence regarding fairness given by Dr Martin]]]

[[[ and Mr King]]]

[[[ on 2 December 2013]]]1.1 I write again in my personal capacity as someone who has had personal dealings with the Local Government Ombudsman (LGO) intermittently since 1994.&#xa0;1.2 I have read the oral evidence given by Dr Martin and Mr King and believe there have been some misunderstandings regarding my previous written evidence which I wish to correct.  I also wish to supply further evidence regarding what happens in practice from the complainants’ standpoint because I believe the Select Committee (CLG) may still be unaware of the lack of fairness in the procedure.&#xa0;1.3 Mr King, in response to Q 35, states that “During an investigation, we will share any key documents with both parties to make sure they have sight of the evidence on which we are relying”.  In 2005 I requested sight of the documents relating to my complaints that were held in the Ombudsman’s files and was told by an Assistant Ombudsman, Mr R Stephen, that “Under the Local Government Act 1974 (section 32(2)), the Ombudsman is not permitted to disclose any information obtained in the course of, or for the purposes of, the investigation of a complaint, unless he or she considers it is necessary for the purposes of the investigation”.  I complained to the Information Commission which confirmed that the Ombudsman did not have to release these documents.  I have therefore never had sight of evidence collected by the Ombudsman from original sources such as individual council officers but which have been relied upon by the Ombudsman when reaching a decision.  It is my understanding that all complainants are prevented from seeing such documents.  &#xa0;1.4 Mr King goes on to say “Before we make a decision, both parties will be consulted on what we call a provisional view. That sets out the decision we are minded to make, and both parties at the same time will have the opportunity to comment on that view.”  This provisional view is arrived at when a Local Authority (LA) - in my experience the Chief Executive - has written back to the Ombudsman giving a response which, if accepted by the Ombudsman, means that no further investigation is carried out by the Ombudsman.  The response from the LA is therefore hearsay because the Chief Executive relies on the Strategic Director who in turn relies on the Head of Department.  This means that the Ombudsman and the complainant never get to see what actual evidence/original sources have been relied upon by the Chief Executive and other senior officers when compiling his response if it relates to oral evidence from officers.  &#xa0;1.5 In my earlier submission, I was suggesting at paragraph 2.3 that LAs were required to append transcripts of interviews with the officers which took place as part of the LAs own internal investigation of a complaint.  This should include all interviews that had taken place from the first time the complainant lodged a complaint with the LA right up until the complainant reached the end of the LA’s complaint procedure.  The inclusion of these documents providing evidence from original sources would prevent the Chief Executive or any other senior officer responding on the basis of wishful thinking as took place in my case.  In addition, it would also show whether any investigation had actually been carried out which my case would have been useful because it had not.&#xa0;1.6 After the Provisional View stage referred to by Mr King, if the Ombudsman decides to visit the Council and interview officers rather than discontinue the investigation on the basis of the Chief Executive’s response, the secrecy (upheld by the Information Commission) surrounding the evidence gathered by the Ombudsman means complainants do not know which officers were interviewed, what they said or whether their evidence was reliable.  It is therefore impossible for complainants to challenge the actual evidence in a way that could be considered fair.&#xa0;1.7 In my case, the LA mislead the LGO over a number of years and the Head of Department within the LA, who under the LA’s complaints procedure was required to make the first response to my complaints to the LA itself, always rebutted my complaints.  His first response became a template that was replicated as my complaint progressed through the LA’s internal complaints procedure until it was endorsed by the Chief Executive at the final stage and then became the LA’s official position once the Ombudsman became involved.  &#xa0;1.8 What appears particularly unfair is that the Head of Department ‘investigating’ my complaint was implicated in the causation of the maladministration complained of and yet the LA procedures permitted him to ‘investigate’ himself and other more junior members of his department over whom he had managerial responsibility.  The Chief Executive then perpetuated his narrative to the Ombudsman. &#xa0;1.9 In response to Q48 regarding the validating of evidence provided by local authorities, Dr Martin: claims to ensure that the evidence used is “fair and properly validated”.  Mr King states “we investigate thoroughly and forensically where that is required”.  I do not accept either of these statements.  The Ombudsman does not consider she should re-open my complaint despite it now being known that the LA failed to carry out its own internal investigation by someone not involved in the maladministration and failed to document any investigation at all.  The only thorough and forensic examination of the facts was carried out by a new basic grade LA officer who could not comprehend the viewpoint taken by the CEO (which is still accepted by the Ombudsman) and the new officer took advice from the Legal Services Manager who disagreed with the CEO.  It is the responsibility of that Legal Services Manager (a qualified solicitor unlike the CEO) to provide advice to the LA on this matter.  This conflict is undeniable proof of the maladministration but the Ombudsman refuses to look into the conflict and as recently as 6.12.13. told me that as extensive an investigation as necessary was carried out prior to the appointment of the officer who uncovered the true facts with the advice from the Legal Services Manager.  This officer has told me that no-one has ever asked him about the matter in relation to my complaints to the LA.  There can be no doubt in my case that the Ombudsman has been misled but then in the face of the undeniable conflict refuses to admit that the investigations were not as thorough as necessary. 1.10 In Q 49 Dr Martin is asked whether she would “require written transcripts of the interviews from council officers” and she replies by referring only to the interviews carried out by the Ombudsman.  I have explained the reasons for my suggestion at 1.5 above and I firmly believe they would help everyone.1.11 I omitted suggesting that the transcripts of the interviews carried out by the Ombudsman were appended because I knew that this suggestion would be rejected by the Ombudsman citing current legislation.1.12. I hope that the CLG will be able to pursue my points regarding fairness because it is no-one’s interests for maladministration to be allowed to continue in even one case especially when LA funds are as limited as now.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;17 December 20131&#xa0;