&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by]]]

[[[ ]]]

[[[Professor Clive Walker [CT 05]]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Introduction]]]1              This paper responds to the call on 23 July 2013 for evidence from the Home Affairs Committee on aspects of the ‘Pursue’ strand of the CONTEST strategy. This paper addresses just one element: ‘Whether the Charities Commission has reduced the ability of terrorists to obtain funding through charitable donations.’2              Discussion in this paper derives from my research over many years into anti-terrorism laws and also, more recently, into regulatory action and litigation involving charities suspected of financing terrorism. For fuller details and arguments, see principally:&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Background]]]3              Attention to the financing of terrorism has intensified since the attacks on September 11, 2001. Underlying characteristics within charities which give rise to vulnerability include enhanced public trust, diversity of financial activities, cash intensiveness, complex multiple donor patterns, and the involvement of politically committed individuals. &#xa0;4              The potential link between charities and terrorism finance was signalled internationally by the Financial Action Task Force (‘FATF’) in October 2001, when it issued its Special Recommendation VIII on Terrorism Financing. The FATF identifies three categories of charity abuse. The first concerns the use of bogus charities as fronts for terrorists. The second is the fraudulent (or at least furtive) diversion of properly raised funds which are subverted towards terrorist purposes. The third example involves broader exploitation of a charitable umbrella, such as through the recruitment and payment of extremists or for the propagation or glorification of a militant ideology. It is difficult to find clear examples in the United Kingdom within the first category. The second category will typically arouse suspicions about the humanitarian work abroad of cultural associations based within minority communities. The third category also presents some risk.&#xa0;5              The risk of charitable funding of jihadi terrorism is viewed as affected by two further factors. One is the Islamic custom of zakat – the duty of donating personal wealth for charitable purposes. The second factor affects those charities which are active in regions of conflict (such as Afghanistan, Pakistan, Palestine, Somalia, and, hitherto, Sri Lanka). They are thereby especially vulnerable to the risks from working alongside protagonists within the conflict and by the limits or costs of formal banking systems requiring reliance upon informal remittance systems.&#xa0;6              These depictions of the political and legal salience of contemporary terrorism finance and the centrality of charities in its operation underplay the personal (non-financial) commitment which drives terrorism and the personal integrity of charity workers who view their independence from terrorism and government as crucial to their work. The allegations of complicity in terrorism also overplay the analogy to criminal racketeering or more generally to rational choice theory. Terrorist operations are often inexpensive, especially for the late modern (dis)organisation of many jihadi groups, and do not start with the motive of amassing personal wealth. &#xa0;7              So far as the United Kingdom law is concerned, legislation against the funding of terrorism is a core part of ‘CONTEST’ and is executed by the Terrorism Act 2000, Part III, as supplemented by Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001, Part I, the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008, Part V, and the Terrorist Asset-Freezing etc. Act 2010. This submission will first briefly explain these policing mechanisms. The findings will lead into analysis of the key questions: ‘do they work’ and, if so, 'who pays the price' of the policing and regulatory burdens? &#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[P]]]

[[[olicing and regulatory mechanisms applied to charities]]]8              Whether within the 'policing' or 'regulation' of charities, there are the following essential elements of activity: the specification of rules or standards; the monitoring of compliance; and the establishment of enforcement devices. These elements are reflected at two policing levels: 'internal' and 'external'. &#xa0;

[[[Internal ]]]

[[[policing]]]9              Internal policing applied to charities demands that they should monitor their own business and procedures to ensure that terrorism financing does not take place. A number of specialist measures comprise this watchfulness against terrorism financing.&#xa0;10              First, trustees of charities, like everyone else, must not to withhold information about terrorism, breach of which is a criminal offence (section 38B(2) of the Terrorism Act 2000). A more onerous duty along the same lines is imposed by section 19(1) of the Terrorism Act 2000. When a person believes or suspects that another person has committed an offence under either of sections 15 to 18 on the basis of information accruing in the course of a trade, profession, business, or employment, an offence is committed if the information is not disclosed to a police officer or member of the Serious Organised Crime Agency ('SOCA') or even the Charity Commission as soon as reasonably practicable. In the drafting of section 19, the government emphasised the confinement of the onerous duty to professionals. However, the reach of section 19 has been significantly supplemented by the Counter-Terrorism Act 2008, section 77, arising from allegations that charities were being misused for terrorism financing and that trustees did not pay sufficient attention – thus, in 2006, just 48 Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) were issued from the charitable sector, a dearth of suspicion which officialdom found 'hard to explain'. Section 77 inserts, as section 22A of the Terrorism Act 2000, a new definition of ‘employment’ which encompasses both paid and unpaid employment and can even include voluntary work. In this way, unpaid volunteers who are the trustees of a charity must act with the same insight as professional forensic accountants.&#xa0;11              An even stricter duty to disclose is imposed on the ‘regulated sector’ by Schedule 2, Part III, of the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001. Under section 21A (inserted into the Terrorism Act 2000), a person in that sector commits an offence by knowing or suspecting or having reasonable grounds for knowing or suspecting, that another person has attempted or committed an offence under either of sections 15 to 18 (including with extra-territorial effect), unless that information is disclosed to a constable, officer of SOCA, or the employer’s nominated officer as soon as practicable. The duty is subject to a reasonable excuse not to disclose. The objective standard of liability, which can arise without subjective awareness of any suspicion, is justified by the ‘[g]reater awareness and higher standards of reporting in the financial sector’. Charities do not generally fall within the 'regulated sector', but the financial institutions which handle their transactions certainly do so. For instance, the Royal Bank of Scotland was fined £5.6m (including a 30% discount for early settlement) by the Financial Services Authority in 2010 for failing to ensure funds were not transferred to people or organisations on sanctions lists, leading to an 'unacceptable risk' of facilitating terrorist financing. More serious criticisms and regulatory penalties and civil litigation have also been encountered by UK financial institutions in the United States, arising from the alleged defaults of United Kingdom banks in respect of accounts held by charities.&#xa0;

[[[External ]]]

[[[policing]]]12              External policing is principally exerted by the Charity Commission, under Part II of the Charities Act 2011. In the context of alleged links to terrorism, there may be two triggers for investigation. One is that the charity is overstepping the boundaries of its charitable status by supporting political purposes which are espoused by terrorist groups. This first potential problem has not been the prime issue. Instead, the allegation is commonly that money is being used to fund activities which are in part political or social but also in part violent.&#xa0;13              The enforcement powers of the Charity Commission, in sections 76 to 87 of the Charities Act 2011, are sweeping but rarely used and are in practice circumscribed by two limitations. The first is that while charities with a turnover above a specified amount (of £5,000) must register under section 30 of the Charities Act 2011, there is no obligation to adopt the form of a charity by not-for-profit bodies. Some groups are suspicious of potential meddling or do not recognise any benefit in registration. For example, despite the efforts of the Faith and Social Cohesion Unit set up in 2007, a minority of the estimated 1,672 mosques in the United Kingdom are registered. &#xa0;14              The second limitation is that policing and enforcement are secondary in the constitution and culture of the Charity Commission. The Mission of the Charity Commission involves ‘enabling’, ‘encouraging’, and ‘promoting’, while its statutory objectives in section 14 of the Charities Act 2011 comprise legal compliance by charity trustees with their legal obligations as just one objective amongst several. Likewise, the 'general functions' of the Commission in section 15(1)(3), without mention of any punitive or prohibitory sanction, refer to 'Identifying and investigating apparent misconduct or mismanagement in the administration of charities and taking remedial or protective action in connection with misconduct or mismanagement in the administration of charities.' The 'green-light' approach of the Charity Commission can be further evidenced by its six general duties in section 16 of the Charities Act 2011. General Duty 2 states that 'So far as is reasonably practicable, the Charity Commission must act in a way which is compatible with the encouragement of (a) all forms of charitable giving, and (b) voluntary participation in charity work.' Furthermore, in performing all its functions, the Commission is required by General Duty 4 to 'have regard to the principles of best regulatory practice (including the principles under which regulatory activities should be proportionate, accountable, consistent, transparent and targeted only at cases in which action is needed).' In this way, the Commission constitutes a 'green-light' regulator rather than a 'red-light' regulator. Because of this approach, more formal policing agencies find it hard to take over investigations started by the Charity Commission. The claim that the Charity Commission is hobbled, in part by the framing of law and in part as a self-induced restraining organisational culture, may be next tested by some case studies.&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[T]]]

[[[he application of external policing]]]

[[[Regulatory responses]]]15              If a charity becomes designated under the international sanctions regimes, the need for regulatory action is palpable. But designation has only affected two charities operating in the United Kingdom jurisdiction. Assuming a charity is not internationally designated, then regulatory action is much less straightforward. The version of 'green-light' regulation thesis adopted here is not that the Charity Commission wholly ignores allegations of terrorism. Its caseload of 180 investigations in 2009-10 included 11 which related to allegations or suspicions of terrorist-related activities. Rather, the issue is whether its resolve to deal with the allegations is sufficiently firm. Three cases might be highlighted. These are selected as more recent than the notorious case of Abu Hamza’s involvement in the North London Central Mosque (Finsbury Park), more straightforward than the various inquiries into Interpal, the facts about which are disputed, and less affected by media pressures (as applied to the handling of Viva Palestina).&#xa0;16              One case concerned the Ikhlas Foundation, which was registered in 1997 and whose main work involved the 'Muslim Prisoner Support Group' and especially related to prisoners impugned for involvement in terrorism. The group had been of serial concern to the Charity Commission because of the activities of various trustees. In 2007, Mohammed al-Ghabra, a trustee, was removed after he was designated by the UN and by the HM Treasury in December 2006. The Charity Commission was apparently unaware of this designation until informed in July 2007; he was removed as a trustee in October 2007. However, no sanction was imposed on the remaining trustees even though the Commission viewed them as inadequately recognising or managing the risks. Instead, the inquiry was closed on the commitment by remaining trustees to strengthen their governance within three months. That undertaking by the trustees did not bear fruit. A second inquiry began in 2008, when another trustee, Abbas Taj, was suspended by the Commission (and later resigned) following his arrest in 2008 and conviction in 2009 for conspiring in an arson attack on a publisher. The Commission recorded that the trustees had failed to deliver on their previous commitments. Despite this recurrently woeful record, the Commission concluded its second inquiry by issuing a direction under section 19A by which the trustees were set a further few months to regularise their meetings and membership, to conduct a risk assessment, and to mitigate risks. Given that the charity had a very modest income of around £5,000 per annum, the risk of terrorism financing should not be exaggerated. Nevertheless, the patience of the Charity Commission accorded to this serially delinquent charity was astonishing, though the Ikhlas Foundation has since been removed from the Register of Charities.&#xa0;17              The second case, Iqra, a bookshop and learning centre in Beeston, Leeds, registered as a charity in 2003. Its activities came to an abrupt halt in 2005, when it was confirmed that two of the July 7 bombers, Mohammed Siddique Khan and Shehzad Tanweer, had acted as trustees. The police raided its premises, as a result of which the remaining trustees claimed that the charity had become inoperative. Another trustee, Khalid Kaliq was subsequently convicted of terrorist-related offences not directly related to Iqra. Yet, not until 2009 did the Charity Commission decide to launch a formal inquiry, and even that step seems to have been prompted by media reports. In the event, the Commission found no evidence that Iqra's finances or premises had been used for the preparation of the July 7 attacks, and it can hardly be blamed for not detecting terrorist connections more astutely than the police or security agencies. However, the Commission found that extremist materials had been possessed and also admitted that no action had been taken over the fact that no reports or accounts had ever been filed by the trustees. Awakening from this stupor after further prodding by the media, the Commission took steps to seize the remaining trust money (£12,500). &#xa0;18              The third example concerns the charity, Sivayogam, an organisation which worked with Tamils both in London and in northern Sri Lanka. Concerns surfaced in 2005 when it became public that the leading trustee, Nagendram Seevaratnam, had professed LTTE sympathies. The Inquiry instigated by the Charity Commission found problems with the selection and monitoring of local partners in Sri Lanka, with financial accounting, and with the involvement of a trustee who remained openly supportive of the LTTE. In another example of its 'green-light' style, the Charity Commission imposed the sanction of removal of one trustee but otherwise sought to work with the impugned charity to improve its standards. Even the attempted removal was reversed by the First-Tier Tribunal (Charity), which viewed the trustee's statements as merely 'unwise and unguarded' and that contact with the LTTE did not make it necessary or desirable to remove him. Furthermore, the Tribunal endorsed a 'green-light' regulatory approach: 'If there had remained any legitimate regulatory concerns following a proper examination of the evidence originally provided to it, the Tribunal concludes that it would have been appropriate for the Respondent to work with the charity to improve its processes before considering exercising its regulatory powers.'&#xa0;

[[[A]]]

[[[ssessment of responses]]]19              This track record of the Charity Commission does not match the seriousness with which the threat of terrorism is depicted in CONTEST. That verdict is subject to two provisos. One is that further efforts have been instituted since 2006 to improve the relevant guidance. The second point is that there are competing public interests which may legitimately affect the degree and manner of intervention by regulators. These two provisos will now be considered.&#xa0;20              In response to the evident perils of terrorist abuse and infiltration of charities, the Home Office and HM Treasury reviewed the policing regime in their 2007 report, Review of Safeguards to Protect the Charitable Sector (England and Wales) from Terrorist Abuse’. The government departments urged the Charity Commission to reinforce its guidance, and it responded in 2008 by publishing its Counter-Terrorism Strategy wherein it promised 'zero tolerance'. In pursuance of its strategy, various actions have been undertaken to improve trustee awareness, including oversight through a Proactive Monitoring Unit, cooperation between enforcement agencies, and greater intervention. Published advice has been further elaborated through the issuance of an Operational Guidance and a Compliance Toolkit, setting out the Commission’s approach, and underlining the duties of vigilance and disclosure of trustees, illustrating the possible threats, and giving advice about the work of the Counter Terrorism Team which forms part of the Intensive Casework Unit in Compliance and Support. The Compliance Toolkits were impressively expanded in 2013.&#xa0;21              Despite these documentary elaborations, there has been no discernible change in the 'green-light' approach. The Home Office commented in its 2011 paper on Prevent Strategy as part of the 'Next Steps' agenda that 'The Charity Commission must be seen to be capable of taking robust and vigorous action against charities that are involved in terrorist activity or have links to terrorist organisations.' The accompanying independent survey by Lord Carlile is more candidly critical of the Commission. This analysis of the continuing attitude and approach of the Charity Commission tallies with some recommendations in the report by Lord Hodgson in 2012, Trusted and independent: giving charity back to charities - review of the Charities Act 2006. Lord Hodgson not only calls for automatic trustee disqualification following any conviction of a terrorism offence (which would not make much difference) but also that the Charity Commission should take ‘a more robust approach to potentially failing organisations’ and ‘proactive as well as reactive steps’ in cases of abuse. &#xa0;22              Moving next to the competing public goods, these countervailing considerations are that British society should not appear to be stone-hearted in the face of humanitarian crises in conflict zones, such as in Palestine, Somalia, and Sri Lanka. Such a stance might even aggravate the situation by encouraging less regulated and less cooperative activities, even resulting in a strategic defeat. An illustration of such upheaval arises from the United Nations listing of the Al Barakaat group in Somalia from 2001 to 2009. However, another public good is the punishment of wrongdoing which, in this case, may curtail the financing of terrorism and uphold the integrity of the charitable sector. &#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[F]]]

[[[uture ]]]

[[[regulation]]]23              The United Kingdom approach to charities assailed by the taint of terrorism funding has been one of considerate understanding if not, at times, excessive 'green-light' leniency. Equally, their bankers are rarely at risk except in US civil courts. Thus, worthy individuals pay the highest price for relief work at the margins of legality. The Charity Commission is wholly correct to be highly suspicious of self-serving allegations from the opponents of Palestinians, Tamils, and other oppressed peoples and to adopt a stance which is primarily encouraging of compliance with high standards of governance rather than a condemnatory approach. But its serial indulgence of patent abuses does not aid the charitable sector.  &#xa0;24              Two facile reactions should be avoided. One would be to swing entirely towards criminal prosecution and asset forfeiture, a stance which would unduly ignore competing public goods. The second mistake would be to seek to reinforce the punitive resolve of the Charity Commission. The data from this chapter suggests that the Commission's weak statutory remit and entrenched ‘enabling’ culture cannot easily be nudged. A more promising third way is to emphasise the value of financial investigation to facilitate intelligence-gathering. Prosecution and confiscation remain possible outcomes but should be less pressing than disruption and the gathering and transmission of data about terrorism activities other than just financing. &#xa0;25              A financial investigation approach could have produced outcomes of greater utility to counter-terrorism in several of the inquiries described in this paper. It would have been more likely to have delivered information about terrorism networks and to close off the facilitation of militancy, but without hurting worthy causes. This financial investigation approach is not best placed in the hands of the Charity Commission but should primarily be conducted by a formal police body. The roles left for the Charity Commission would be as standard-setter, as standard-monitor (with early alerts back to the police financial investigators), and as standard-applier (with police advice). In this way, the heaviest price for terrorism financing should be paid by professional profit-takers and recipient perpetrators of terrorism.&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Professor Clive Walker]]]

[[[Centre for Criminal Justice Studies]]]

[[[School of Law ]]]

[[[University of Leeds]]]

[[[September 2013]]]11&#xa0;               These rules were revised in 2012: http://www.fatf-gafi.org/topics/fatfrecommendations/documents/ixspecialrecommendations.html. See further FATF, International Best Practices: Combating the abuse of non-profit organisations - Special Recommendation VIII (Paris: 2002).               FATF, Terrorist Financing (Paris: 2008) 10, 11.               See Home Office, Countering International Terrorism (London: Cm 6888, 2006), as updated by (London: Cm 7547, 2009; Cm 7833, 2010; Cm 8123, 2011; Cm 8583, 2013).               See HM Treasury, The Financial Challenge to Crime and Terrorism (London: 2007); Home Office and HM Treasury, Review of Safeguards to Protect the Charitable Sector (England and Wales) from Terrorist Abuse (London: 2007).               Home Office and HM Treasury, Review of Safeguards to Protect the Charitable Sector (England and Wales) from Terrorist Abuse (London: 2007) paras 3.3, 3.6. The impact of SARs is debated: House of Lords European Union Committee, Money Laundering and the Financing of Terrorism HL 132 (2008–09) and HL 11 (2010-11).               Terrorism Act 2000, Sch 3A, as substituted by: Terrorism Act 2000 (Business in the Regulated Sector and Supervisory Authorities) Order 2007, SI 2007/3288; Terrorism Act 2000 and Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (Amendment) Regulations 2007, SI 2007/3398.                Home Office, Regulatory Impact Assessment: Terrorist Property (London: 2001) para 8.               &lt;http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/other/rbs_group.pdf &gt;.               See US Senate Permanent Sub-Committee on Investigations, US Vulnerability to Money Laundering, Drugs and Terrorist Financing (Washington DC: 2012). HSBC paid a fine of $1.92bn.                See Weiss v National Westminster Bank 2008 US Dist LEXIS 99443 (EDNY), (2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 52628, USDC EDNY, 28 March 2013).                See Charity Commission, Speaking Out - Campaigning and Political Activity by Charities (London: CC9, 2008).                Home Office and HM Treasury, Review of Safeguards to Protect the Charitable Sector (England and Wales) from Terrorist Abuse (London: 2007) para 3.               See Charities Back on Track 2011-12: Themes and lessons from the Charity Commission's investigations and regulatory casework (London: 2012) p 32.               Compare &lt;http://www.muslimsinbritain.org/resources/masjid_report.pdf&gt; ; Charity Commission, Survey of Mosques in England and Wales (London: 2009) p 5, and Annual Report 2009/10 HC 77 (2010-11) 7.               Annual Report 2009/10 HC 77 (2010-11) 22.               The terms are adapted from C. Harlow and R. Rawlings, Law and Administration (Cambridge: 3rd ed, Cambridge University Press, 2009) chap 1.                Home Office and HM Treasury, Review of Safeguards to Protect the Charitable Sector (England and Wales) from Terrorist Abuse (London: 2007) para 3.20.               Home Office, Prevent Strategy Cm 8092 (2011) para 10.196.               Charity Commission, Inquiry Reports: The Ikhlas Foundation (London: 2008 and 2010).                See HM Treasury v al-Ghabra [2010] UKSC 2 at [1].                Charity Commission, Inquiry Report: The Ikhlas Foundation (London: 2010) paras 38, 39.                Charity Commission, Inquiry Report: Iqra (London: 2011).               Charity Commission, Inquiry Report: Sivayogam (London: 2010).               Nagendram Seevaratnam v Charity Commission for England and Wales and Her Majesty’s Attorney General (CA/2008/0001, 13 October 2009) para 6.52.               Ibid, paras 6.93, 6.117               Ibid, para 6.75.               (London: 2007) para 2.10.               (London: 2008) 4, 10.               Charity Commission, OG96: Charities and Terrorism (London: 2007); Charity Commission,  Compliance Toolkit: protecting charities from harm (London: 2011).               &lt;http://www.charitycommission.gov.uk/detailed-guidance/protecting-your-charity/protecting-charities-from-harm-compliance-toolkit/&gt;.               Home Office, Prevent Strategy Cm 8092 (2011) para 10.203.               Lord Carlile, Report to the Home Secretary of Independent Oversight of Prevent Review and Strategy (London: Home Office, 2011) paras 58, 60.               (London: Cabinet Office, 2012). See also Response to the Charities Act review from the Minister for Civil Society (Cabinet Office, 2012).                Ibid., para 4.53.               Ibid., para 4.29, 5.28.               M Scheinin, Reports of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism (A/HRC/6/17, 2007) para 48.