                            DAR 08

[[[          ]]]

[[[Non-attributable note from a development professional]]]

[[[ on business caes]]]

[[[']]]Business cases are too intricate and require too many different people to be involved in their completion.  The origin of the more complex business case is in the increased emphasis on results introduced by the coalition government.  While the results emphasis is positive, the way it is being processed is not, and is in fact helping prevent the achievement of results.It is the combination of the unwieldy business case and the requirement for Secretary of State approval for virtually every spending decision that causes the most difficulty. Officials are very nervous about documents that are seen by the Minister. They will seek to ensure that these documents are as near perfection as possible.  Many more officials in the decision-making chain get involved in reviewing the documents.  Drafts are sent back to be redone. Appendices are poured over and revised.  Language is tightened.In one case, which took over 9 months from completion of original business case to approval, officials were commenting on each other’s comments and holding up review of the next drafts because they were on holiday. This happens all too often. Of course those commenting often don’t understand the details of the proposal because they are remote from it, thus causing confusion which then needs to be cleared up.Then in some circumstances the Secretary of State asks a question because she doesn’t understand some aspect, and a whole new flurry of activity starts.There is in fact a second round of Secretary of State approvals, relating to contracts.  Every contract or contract amendment above £1m has to go to Secretary of State for approval.   So one spending programme may go through three or four or more Secretary of State approvals – at business case, at contract approval and at approval of one or more amendments. Again this involves substantial delays, as associated paperwork is prepared and argued over by officials. Procurement staff spend months disputing costs and quarrelling over minutiae. If contract amendments are involved, the delays can be very damaging.  Funding runs out and project teams have to be stood down. This hurts DFID’s reputation as a reliable and credible organisation. Counterparts have been promised assistance and are astounded when it stops.  Their own credibility is sometimes also undermined. Momentum is lost. Restarting activities is inevitably more costly.&#xa0;A key aspect of the overall problem are the disincentives provided to DFID staff by the heavy and time-consuming procedures.  It’s always more difficult to find the dog that didn’t bark, but there will be many valuable initiatives that have not been started because DFID staff either could not summon the enthusiasm or have the time to fill in all the necessary paperwork, or realised that the whole process would take so long as to make it futile. In many circumstances an intervention needs to be done quickly if it is to be at all effective. Intricate project description and approval requirements mean that action cannot be taken quickly, thus it is often not attempted at all. DFID’s reputation for speed and flexibility is being lost.It has been said by some DFID staff that there are so many procedures these days that no-one knows what they are. This creates a natural hesitancy to proceed on behalf of some staff.  In some circumstances staff don't go ahead with an activity because they imagine that a procedure prevents it when in fact this is not so. All this leads to climate of conservatism and cautiousness, where the least risky course seems the most attractive. The solution is to (a) greatly streamline project preparation activities and (b) remove the requirement for Secretary of State approval, except in the case of very large or very politically sensitive spending programmes. DFID staff should be trusted to take decisions.&#xa0;