&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by the Association of Employment and Learning Providers (AELP)]]]

[[[Introduction]]]The Association of Employment and Learning Providers (AELP) represents the interests of a range of organisations delivering vocational learning and employment and employability support.  The majority of our 650+ member organisations are independent providers (from both the private and the third sectors) holding contracts with the Skills Funding Agency, with many also delivering Department for Education (EFA) and Department of Work and Pensions (DWP) funded provision.  In addition to these we have a number of colleges in membership, as well as non-delivery organisations such as SSCs and awarding bodies as Associate Members, which means that AELP offers a well rounded and comprehensive perspective and insight on matters relating to its remit. 

[[[Comments]]]1. We welcome the significant increase in the proportion of independent providers being rated good or outstanding in their Ofsted inspections over the past 12 months.  The number of independent providers rated good or outstanding in the last academic year rose from 60% to 67%.2. We were also pleased with the overall number of providers improving their grades (32% of providers inspected) in comparison with last year’s figures, however, there were some (16%) whose overall rating fell.  We recognise that any provider receiving an inadequate grade is still a cause for concern we are committed to working with Ofsted, the Education and Training Foundation and providers to address this challenge.3. The observations in the Chief Inspector’s annual report are based on findings of the first year of the new Common Inspection Framework (CIF) with the revised Framework’s emphasis on the quality of teaching and learning.  Most providers will now have built the quality processes into their delivery models and we would expect the improvements to continue.  Indeed, recently there have been two grade 1 inspections of independent providers.  4. Delivery of teaching and learning in a work based environment is different to the traditional classroom approaches.  Work based learning by definition takes place in the many different environments of the workplace, often involving very small groups or even individual trainees.  The training provider may also be operating over several sites, which requires management oversight of a consistent set of standards.  Independent providers score highly in terms of flexibility of their training and meeting employers’ needs, factors key to the effective delivery of training and important elements in the CIF standards.  As employers take a more central role in the development of programmes employer responsiveness will be an increasingly important factor in the inspection process.   5. We note that the Ofsted Annual Report suggests “that there is still too much provision that is not responsive to local employment needs” and that “training providers need to ensure that vocational provision is better matched to the needs of local businesses and communities”.  We must point out that apprenticeship provision precisely reflects the real time needs of local businesses as all apprentices are now employed by those same businesses and apprenticeships are attracting hugely impressive satisfaction rates from both employers (92%) and apprentices (89%) alike.  6. AELP does, however, believe that LEPs have a role to play in developing local skills and employability strategies.  Their knowledge of their locality should be used to identify needs and opportunities, in conjunction with providers, to inform the development of appropriate local skills and employability provision across the country.  We are committed to working with the LEPs and local employers to ensure that they play a full part in the delivery of those local skills strategies and we would recommend full engagement and involvement of providers on LEP Boards and Committees.7. The report goes on to state that apprenticeships are failing to meet their full potential because young people are not sufficiently employable, lacking basic skills, aptitudes in vocational and employability skills and appropriate attitudes for work.  This is not the fault of apprenticeships or their providers, but the result of failure of the school system to prepare all young people adequately for the world of work.  Hopefully the introduction of study programmes, and Traineeships in particular, will help address these issues and enable more young people to progress into employment and ideally apprenticeships.  It will be important however that Ofsted recognises that progression into an apprenticeship is not the only successful outcome for Traineeships, and that any employment, or progression to further training or HE, must also be seen as successful outcomes for the new programme.8. It is also true that success rates play a significant part in determining the grade of the provider.  Delivering to some hard-to-help groups in difficult working environments can mean it is very challenging to deliver high success rates and this partly explains why classroom based learning has traditionally had higher success rates.  &#xa0;9. We agree with the comments on the need for good careers guidance.  All young people should have impartial and independent careers advice about all their options, including the costs of various routes open to them, the funding available, the range of occupations that can be accessed as well as the labour market demand and likely wage returns for these occupations.  Under the current arrangements access to independent careers advice is inadequate and many providers believe that the signposting to vocational training needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency, a view seemingly shared by Chief Inspector, Sir Michael Wilshaw, following Ofsted’s review of careers guidance in schools in 2013.  We also agree the finding that there is no easy system for transferring information on young people directly from schools to other providers.  Both issues – good careers guidance and the need for a simple system to transfer information – need to be addressed as a priority.10. We note that English and maths provision remains a significant concern.  The report does, however recognise that many FE and skills providers are working with learners who failed to achieve level 2 in these vital skills at school.  It also recognises that young people achieved better results in functional English and maths than those taking GCSEs as a repeat.  This supports our long held position, that functional skills must not be replaced by GCSEs in those subjects until the qualifications have been reformed to ensure the content, assessment strategy and flexibility of the examination structure is appropriate for the workplace.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Conclusion]]]The achievement of high standards of delivery which are reflected in Ofsted grades has never been more important.  With the requirement for providers to have grades 1 or 2 to deliver traineeships, the need to achieve good grades has become more important and AELP and its members recognise this.  &#xa0;We are confident that independent training providers can respond to this challenge and deliver excellent results.   We will work with Ofsted to ensure that the inspection framework recognises excellent delivery and creates the platform for provider improvement.  This will enable us to work in partnership with providers to generate better grades across the sector.&#xa0;AELP would welcome the opportunity to discuss these comments in more detail with members of the Committee as it prepares for the evidence session in February.&#xa0;January 2014&#xa0; Source: FE Week special supplement dated September 2013 on Ofsted inspections 2012-13 Data taken from NAS website. BIS research paper No 76, May 2012.  The proportion satisfied rose to 92% amongst completers. The AELP responses to the APPG Local Growth skills inquiry and the APPG consultation, Rising to the challenge: how LEPs can deliver local growth strategies set out our position on localism and LEPs in more detail. Going in the right direction? Careers guidance in schools from September 2012.  Report by Ofsted published in September 2013.