&#xa0;

[[[Submission from Wakefield Council on behalf of the Key Cities Group (FDC15)]]]

[[[Inquiry into fiscal devolution to Cities and Local Enterprise Partnerships]]]Submission by Peter Box CBE, Leader, Wakefield Council and Joanne Roney OBE, Chief Executive Wakefield Council, on behalf of the Key Cities Group.&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Executive Summary]]]1. Government’s current approach to devolution is confusing and lacks coordination and levels of commitment across departments. This is not only in terms of scope but also in terms of funding streams and powers. 2. Devolution to cities is strongly welcomed and the proposals put to government by the Core Cities Group are supported. However to maximise its economic impact and potential to improve public services and reduce costs devolution should go beyond both core cities and Local Enterprise Partnerships. This would not only widen and strengthen impact, but also prevent the risk of increasing economic inequality within regions.3. Medium sized cities are ideally placed to deliver devolution. Tried and tested governance and accountability structures are in place and because of their relative scale and agility Key Cities could speedily deliver significant outcomes and savings for both government and the communities they serve as well as piloting and demonstrating benefits for wider adoption. 4. Devolution has a number of advantages to central government beyond improving outcomes and stimulating economic growth. These include reducing bureaucracy and associated costs and encouraging partnership and innovation at a local level. Devolution also reduces risks to central government by encouraging local partnerships to bear more financial and other risks for delivery of key programmes or projects.5. Devolution should not only be fiscal, it should also come with legislative freedoms and flexibilities to allow partners and communities to take full advantage in terms of fiscal freedoms, e.g. in terms of investment, business support and stimulating housing growth.6. If Government wish to take full advantage of devolution then devolved powers and freedoms need to be coherent across departments, universal and not time limited.7. Government should develop a menu of devolved fiscal and other powers, including borrowing freedoms, to each tier and typology of local authorities – including county and district councils.

[[[Devolution – history and issues  ]]]8. Since the 1990’s the history of devolution to local government in England has been one of ‘earned autonomy’  - freedoms and flexibilities granted to individual councils, often on a time limited basis linked to the achievement of targets, identified through negotiation with central government departments. Local Public Service Agreements, Local Area Agreements and Total Place pilots under the previous government all followed this pattern, and this approach is currently being replicated in individually negotiated City Deals and Community Budget pilots – although there is a welcome recognition from the present government of the value of  multi area (e.g. city region/LEP or county wide) agreements. Governments have also made additional powers for local areas dependent on moving to new governance arrangements e.g. changing the committee system for the Leader and Cabinet model under the previous government, the additional powers for areas with directly elected mayors granted under the 2011 Localism Act and additional freedoms and funding for areas establishing Combined Authorities. 9. The December 2013 National Audit Office ‘Funding and Structures for local economic growth’ report (p35) also noted: “Local bodies have had to coordinate a range of individual initiatives with different objectives, funding arrangements, timetables and reporting requirements. Local Interviewees have told us that departments have different approaches to localism and how far they devolve responsibility differs. This makes it difficult for local bodies to be clear about the policy framework within which they operate”. 10. If Government wish to take full advantage of devolution then devolved powers and freedoms need to be coherent across departments, universal and not time limited, allowing local leaders and business to make and deliver effective long term plans and actions for securing economic growth and sustainability. 11. We note and welcome that the December 2013 autumn statement (p85) stated that Government will be: “working with departments to give local public services the same long-term indicative budgets as departments from the next Spending Review”. Giving local authorities the power to set balanced budgets over the period of these longer term indicative budgets would not only support long term planning for infrastructure and economic growth but also stimulate further medium term ‘invest to save’ activity by local services.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Devolution: ]]]

[[[ F]]]

[[[iscal and ]]]

[[[S]]]

[[[tatutory]]]12. The Key Cities Group welcomes the Committee's decision to explore options for further fiscal devolution at sub national level. We strongly concur with the statement of Greg Clark MP that "… overcentralisation has been such a disaster for urban Britain. Over-mighty and over-extended, the Government has, for decades, robbed our cities of their trump card; their ability to do things differently.”13. Strong fiscal powers, including powers to borrow (through bonds and other means), raise and vary local taxes have been at the heart of the success of European and US cities of all sizes. A recent example is Baltimore, which in December 2013 is finalising a bond of $35m to secure the commencement of the $1.8bn Harbor Point development - transforming the waterfront of that city. 14. There are also clear benefits for the economy and communities through local design and control of programmes. The London Councils ‘Getting London Working’ report found that national models of employment support are delivering around a 4% success rate, whilst those designed locally are achieving over 25% success. 15. Localisation of programmes at city and county level such as the Work Programme and SFA funding would not only reduce costs to central government but encourage innovation at a local level as can be seen by examples such as the Chester/West Cheshire/DWP Community Budget pilot ‘Altogether Better’ programme to tackle worklessness. It is noted and welcomed that BIS intend to transfer greater control of SFA skills capital budgets to Local Enterprise Partnerships, but this process should be taken forward and devolved to local area level – allowing greater focus on issues identified at the front line.16. Devolution would also reduce risk to central government. Local government and their associated local partnerships have a strong track record of accountability (including through the democratic and electoral process), audit and delivering both innovation and efficiency within tight financial limits. Encouraging local areas through devolution of responsibilities as well as funding streams would lead to local authorities and partnerships bearing a higher proportion of risk. Because of their manageable scale and straightforward governance, medium sized cities would also be able to deliver change in key areas (e.g. through better targeted skills funding through working with local employers and training providers) at a faster rate than core cities. In addition, if new policies and programmes are trialled in medium sized cities, it minimises risk for national government and evaluations of the programmes can be shared with other larger and smaller.17. The Key Cities Group would argue that Whitehall should operate on the presumption that all programmes should be devolved and delivered through  existing local areas and local governance arrangements, unless a strong business case can be made – including in terms of cost, risk and efficiency - for the contrary (e.g. national and regional infrastructure projects).18. The Core Cities Group in their November 2013 ‘Growth Prospectus’ have developed a number of proposals for fiscal devolution. These include:               completed irrespective of where that house is built.&#xa0;19. Delivering the above and other devolution measures may require significant and large scale within core cities. Medium sized cities, which have existing statutory powers and governance arrangements (unlike LEP’s) are likely to be able to deliver, demonstrate and evaluate the benefits of devolution. We would welcome working with the Treasury and other government departments to identify projects (e.g. local rate variation, localisation of welfare and skills programmes) that would speedily test out new approaches and deliver significant savings and outcomes for government and taxpayers and significantly stimulate economic growth and job creation. 20. The Key Cities Group supports the freedoms and flexibilities identified by the core cities. However, we note and welcome that the Committee in its proposed lines of inquiry query 'the impact on areas not included in any new devolution arrangements.'  We would strongly argue that a selective approach to devolution would not deliver optimum opportunities for economic growth and could even lead to increased inequality within regions and reduced outcomes overall. 21. An example of this is that in 2012 Westminster City Council collected £1.4bn in Business Rates, of which 90% was returned to Government for wider distribution. If fiscal and other devolution is confined to cities such as London, then there is a risk of a greater proportion of this and similar funding streams being retained without the opportunity for other cities or areas to expand and grow their economies. The Key Cities Group supports both London and the core cities in increasing powers and fiscal control but believe that, in an already recognisably unbalanced UK economy, there are strong risks for more deprived areas in a selective approach to financial devolution.22. The need to balance fiscal localisation with a national approach to tackle inequality and deprivation is noted. However Key Cities would strongly argue that the areas such as landfill tax, and stamp duty and other taxes that have a ‘place basis’ be considered for localisation of finance at city level. This would have the beneficial effect of broadening the tax base and moving local government more swiftly to a self-financing basis.23. Fiscal devolution that does not go beyond core cities runs a clear risk of increasing inequality between local areas and in reducing overall economic growth nationally as it becomes clustered in areas potentially likely to 'overheat', especially in terms of property and housing affordability. 24. London is an exemplar of this overheating in recent years, as well as the risks of concentrating freedoms and flexibilities in selected cities to the detriment of not just other regions, but to areas on their borders. Southend on Sea is approximately 45 miles from London; however the 2010 National Index of Multiple Deprivation classifies 29.9% of its Lower Super Output Areas (around 55,000 residents) as falling within the 30% most deprived areas in the country. Fiscal devolution and increased powers to Southend would act as a significant economic boost to that area and its residents. 25. Devolution should not only apply to cities that are unitary or metropolitan authorities. There is a strong case that those cities which are large second tier authorities within County Councils, e.g. Preston, Norwich, Worcester etc., should also have a distinct menu of new devolved powers available. This would not only promote localism and stimulate economic growth and innovation, but, also by working with smaller neighbouring districts, mitigate risks of increased inequality between areas and encourage cooperation both across local boundaries and between different tiers and types of local authority area. Devolving powers at a more appropriate level of economic and housing activity rather than within outmoded administrative boundaries would set innovation free at this local level.  Devolution needs to be genuinely backed with the powers and flexibilities that will unlock growth locally with clear guidelines – going directly to cities rather than through LEP’s where appropriate. Resolving issues in some areas (e.g. Southampton) around membership/voting on joint statutory committees would also be welcomed to support delivery of current and future Growth Deals.

[[[Going beyond core cities ]]]26. English mid-sized cities have a population of 8.9 million, including some of the fastest growing cities in the country, and the business stock of these cities is larger than England’s Core Cities. In 2011, the combined Gross Value Added of England’s twenty six mid-sized cities amounted to 14% of England’s total and between 2001 and 2011 their total populations grew by more than half a million people. A&#xa0;recent report by Centre for Cities&#xa0;shows that mid-sized English cities have 11% of their jobs in manufacturing, compared to 9% in the Core Cities and 3% in London. Mid-sized cities also have a greater proportion of retail employment (11%) than either the Core Cities (10%) or London (9%).27. The Centre for Cities also identified that the GVA of mid-sized cities was worth £162 billion in 2011, slightly less than the £173 billion in the Core Cities. However, the business stock in mid-sized cities – 275,480 firms, or 13.5 per cent of all those based in England - was slightly larger than that of the Core Cities, which were home to 261,775 firms, or 12.8 per cent of the England total.28. The economy of the United Kingdom is increasingly networked and interconnected. The Work Foundation in their ‘Recession, Recovery and Medium Sized Cities’ report noted that medium-sized cities often have compelling quality of life offerings and also afford opportunities for firms and individuals to take advantage of some of the benefits of agglomeration and co-location without the high costs associated with larger cities. &#xa0;29. The Work Foundation also argues that city performance is affected by the performance of neighbouring cities and that UK cities are increasingly specialising by function rather than sector. Selective devolution would not only hold back those cities, but also reduce opportunities for cities with devolved powers to benefit from economic growth in their neighbours. &#xa0;

[[[A strategic approach to devolution]]]30. As noted above, much of the history of decentralisation and devolution in England has been uncoordinated, selective and short term. 31. The Key Cities Group would propose that government act in a corporate and strategic manner by developing a cross government menu of significant funding streams and powers that local areas could adopt should they meet local needs or provide local opportunities without the need for long and complex negotiations. The long term aim of such a project would be to enable cities to be self-financing and able to respond quickly, positively and effectively to long term challenges.32. For cities these would include the freedoms identified by the Core Cities Group with complimentary powers and devolved funding streams being available to county and larger district councils. This would also support the previous recommendation of the Committee for a more formalised and balanced relationship between central and local government. We believe that this would not only significantly strengthen economic growth but also create and empower strong civic leadership whilst reducing costs of public services to taxpayers and enabling cities to drive economic growth and improved quality of life for all their residents and the wider nation.9 January 20141&#xa0;