&#xa0;

[[[Submission by Leeds City Council (FDC25)]]]IntroductionLeeds City Council welcomes the Select Committee’s inquiry into fiscal devolution in England, and is pleased to offer this submission for consideration. In our evidence we demonstrate why and how fiscal devolution to cities is essential for the unlocking of local and national growth, thus increasing national competitiveness. Underpinning the details of this submission is a clear message: that cities are best placed to take on additional fiscal powers, and we are ready and willing to work with Government to deliver the best possible outcomes for devolution.  The following proposals are outlined for the Committee to consider:The opportunities offered by fiscal devolutionWhile the Coalition Government has demonstrated a welcome appetite for devolution, in too many instances the real powers cities need to drive economic growth have been held back. In order to achieve the growth potential offered by Core Cities such as Leeds, there needs to be a substantial and meaningful shift in current tax distribution arrangements, which currently see local authorities only controlling 5% of the taxes raised in their areas. By meaningful we mean more than simply a distribution of earmarked funds to local authorities. In comparison to cities in Germany, Canada, Sweden, the USA and even Scotland and Wales, English cities continue to be well behind in terms of having the fiscal powers necessary to drive growth. This has a direct and damaging impact on the economic potential and performance of the country as a whole.By devolving fiscal powers to Combined Authorities, and giving them precepting powers, the Government can unlock the growth potential of England’s major cities, driving national economic competitiveness higher, while increasing democratic accountability and oversight of important fiscal functions.Leeds City Council is the local authority for 751,500 individuals, making it the second largest metropolitan area outside of London. It sits at the heart of a successful City Region with an economy worth £53bn.  The Council works closely with the Leeds City Region Local Enterprise Partnership, private, and third sector organisations to promote economic growth that is sustainable, inclusive and shared by all of our citizens.The ongoing financial climate is placing unprecedented pressures on local government to deliver high quality public services while making substantial reductions in expenditure. Despite the impact of the recession and the pressure on services, Leeds has continued to invest in projects and has worked closely with the private sector to attract businesses and visitors to the city. In 2013 the completion of the Trinity Shopping Centre and the Leeds Arena delivered a significant uplift for the local economy, and the Council’s leadership role in these projects has been welcomed by organisations such as the CBI.Leeds recognises the need for local government to become smaller in size while growing in influence, and the importance of working more collaboratively with partners in the private and third sectors to create sustainable and inclusive economic growth and opportunities for all. But at the same time, the Government must recognise that cities have a much greater role to play in driving economic growth and contributing to increased national competitiveness, and that it is a role that cities can only play given greater fiscal powers and freedoms.The Core Cities urban areas have the potential to put 1.16 million more jobs and £222 billion into the economy, which is equivalent to the entire economy of Denmark. It’s equal to almost £14,000 for every person living in a Core City urban area – £52,500 for an average family. However to do this there needs to be a change to our approach towards cities, giving them the power and finances to invest in projects critical to their residents and businesses. Currently local authorities control only 5% of the taxes they raise and 60% of spending in a city is controlled centrally. The OECD average for the level of taxes controlled at the local level is over five times greater than our UK cities enjoy.This system and this philosophy has failed to produce cities that perform above the national average, with only London consistently doing so. As a member of the Core Cities Group, Leeds is committed to a joint proposal to outperform the national economy and to become financially self-sustaining by 2030. To achieve this aim we cannot continue along the current centralised course.Our proposalsWith these above potential opportunities and outcomes in mind, Leeds City Council would make the following proposals to the Committee:On the concept of devolution, particularly on the devolved area and its governmentOver the three years of the Coalition government there have been large scale changes regarding devolved areas beneath the national level. With the dissolving of regional development agencies, the creation of Local Enterprise Partnerships and Combined Authorities, there has been a fundamental shift in governance and leadership at the sub-regional level. The effects of these changes are still being played out, and with this in mind, while it is possible to consider potential governance arrangements for further devolution, we would stress the need for any model of further devolution to be given the time to become effective. In our view, Combined Authorities, with precepting powers as well as devolved mandates, are the most appropriate model for fiscal devolution. With democratic representation from all parts of an area of governance, they offer the essential democratic legitimacy and local knowledge to control fiscal powers for local needs. Fiscal devolution increases local choice and would encourage greater interest in local democracy, instilling meaningful accountability for how taxes raised in a place are spent in that place. Additionally, it would be for each combined authority to establish a productive and collaborative relationship with their Local Enterprise Partnerships, whose role would include articulating the case for investment at the local level and taking responsibility for some aspects of local funding, particularly around infrastructure and business growth.A second governance solution which could be considered would be to change the relationship between Departmental Permanent Secretaries and lead Chief Executives for a Combined Authority area. Delegating Accounting Officer responsibilities to a devolved level would allow Whitehall to retain oversight of devolved funding, but empower Combined Authorities to exercise their judgment on how best to allocate support to local priorities. These Accounting Officers could be provided with place based settlements for revenue funds, which could include Health and Social Care Integration and Skills and Labour Market Agreements. &#xa0;How public services, including employment, skills and welfare, should be organised to complement devolutionThe current arrangements for public services are dominated by individual Government departments offering blanket solutions to complex problems. In our view there is much to gain from taking a more holistic and place based approach, allowing issues such as health and social care and welfare and unemployment to be dealt with in a more joined up way in local communities. Devolved revenue could and should be channelled into meeting local needs that may not be best addressed through national programmes.As an example of this more locally designed approach we support the Core Cities model of a single framework for skills and employment systems, organised through a 5-year ‘Skills and Labour Market Agreement’ with each Core City. This would help the supply of skills within a local labour market to better reflect the demands of that market and its employers, and reduce the current 17% of job vacancies that remain unfilled due to skills-gaps. &#xa0;On the evidence supporting devolution and what new powers could meanThere is a strong and increasingly conclusive evidence base, nationally and internationally, demonstrating that fiscal devolution to cities leads to improved economic growth at the local and national level. Professor Michael Parkinson’s research into second tier cities has shown that countries that have spatial deconcentration of investment and decentralised powers and resources, like Germany, produce cities that outperform the national average. In the UK only London consistently outperforms the average, and evidence demonstrates that this gap between cities and the capital limits national economic performance.Here in the UK, City Deals have shown just some of the possible ways in which devolution can support growth through investment in infrastructure and local services. The Earnback mechanism in Manchester has shown how new fiscal powers can help to build pots for investment in infrastructure projects, for example. And Leeds City Council, through taking control of the Youth Programme and working with local authority partners in Bradford and Wakefield, has been able to support 2,500 young people into education, employment or training; far outperforming the figures for national programmes. These examples demonstrate the potential that cities can offer when they are given new powers and control of finances as well as greater influence over the design of interventions.  This potential is not only of benefit to the cities concerned but also to the country as a whole, having a positive net effect on the national public balance sheet by reducing the demand on welfare and other services while increasing contributions of income tax, National Insurance and corporation tax.            The case for the potential economic impact of the further devolution of powers is, in our view, unarguable. The key decision to be made is how devolution can be implemented while retaining sufficient oversight and accountability for the reassurance of Government.&#xa0;On the details of devolution, including what taxes may be devolved and proposals for new taxesWith current arrangements seeing cities retaining only 5% of the taxes they raise, there is a wealth of potential for devolution of taxes. This is desirable because it will allow areas with different problems and priorities to address their local needs with greater flexibility and efficiency than a nationally consistent and centrally mandated approach can offer. It also means that there will be a more reward driven culture for cities, where their efforts to reduce unemployment or to encourage business expansion will result in greater retention of incoming taxes which can be used to meet service needs and capture future dividends from infrastructure investment. The following taxes are proposed for devolution in their entirety or to contain a financial element to be retained locally.Council TaxWe call for the immediate removal of Council Tax referendum limits. Local authorities know the needs of their areas and should be free to determine their own Council Tax levels having regard to their existing democratic mandates. The new controls over levies that are limiting the capacity of Combined Authorities to raise funding for infrastructure developments should also be removed and in the longer term successful Combined Authorities should be given precepting powers.Council Tax itself is in need of urgent reform. The current property bandings are more than twenty years out of date and arrangements need to be put in place now for general revaluation. The structure and number of Council Tax bands should be reviewed at the same time. Our ambition is that Council Tax be developed as a fully localised tax and that the setting and adjustment of bandings should be done by Combined Authorities. We acknowledge that there will be complications in the first instance in this regard, but we would be willing to work with Government to make this change. The offer in return for this devolution is that retained Council Tax will be used to drive growth and increase prosperity and wellbeing in local areas, better meeting the needs of local citizens and setting bands that more accurately reflect local economic conditions.Business RatesLeeds has welcomed the retention of 50% of business rates beyond an agreed baseline, but believes that local authorities should be able to retain 100% of rates collected. This would further incentivise authorities to support businesses in their area and would recompense authorities for the substantial investment they make in encouraging business growth and business start-ups. Under the current arrangements there was little by way of a tax incentive for Leeds to push for the acclaimed Trinity Shopping Centre, which opened in 2013. If authorities were to keep 100% of business rates this would incentivise other areas to invest and support in such projects and enterprises.It would also be appropriate for cities to set their own business rates, as was the case prior to 1990. Even within city regions there are diverse and complex economies which would be better managed by combined or local authorities controlling the business rates. This would eliminate the problems arising in relation to a nationally set multiplier and encourage cities to come up with innovative approaches to attract and support businesses.An additional option could be to impose a retail levy on business units, similar to that introduced in Northern Ireland on large retail stores. The Northern Ireland Assembly passed a new 8.5% local rate on retail outlets with a rateable value above £500,000, with the money being reinvested to help local SMEs and other growth targets. This same approach could be used in our Core Cities, drawing the benefits from investments into new shopping centres such as the Trinity Centre development in Leeds, and using them to help reinvigorate our local high streets and support local SMEs. Employment TaxCities are being asked to work hard to support jobs and skills in order to boost the economy and reduce benefit bills. And yet despite this, and the costs incurred by local authorities in attempting to improve this situation, authorities are offered no part of the benefits that come from their success in making improvements. A small percentage of devolved finance from either National Insurance or Income Tax would provide local authorities with greater expendable finance to improve employment conditions and meet the needs of their communities that result from greater numbers of jobs i.e. in terms of infrastructure.   &#xa0;On changes to borrowing and new fundingIn terms of borrowing there is not a great deal that we would desire that is not available already. The bigger issue remains that cities lack the revenue streams to repay borrowing, something that fiscal devolution can help to address. One adjustment which would be welcomed would be to change the interest rates for Public Works Loan Board loans, allowing authorities to borrow more to fund infrastructure projects. If borrowing rates for Combined Authorities were equalised with those available to LEPs then there would be less demand placed on those LEPs for them to borrow on their behalf, freeing LEPs to concentrate on other priorities.There is less of a need for new funding, with yields on bonds low and crowd sourcing carrying risks as yet unevaluated, and more of a need to reorganise current arrangements. Capital funds would be much better organised into a single pot for each authority, utilising a new accounting officer function at the Combined Authority level (see above) to ensure accountability. The current system of funds, which includes 36 streams for housing alone, is cumbersome and inefficient.There could also be more done to relieve the need for borrowing by relaxing the rules around commercial returns on fees and charges. For example the current arrangements to ringfence car parking charges, thereby limiting the capacity of authorities to reinvest this revenue to tackle other problems, inhibits local councils from removing pressures to essential services. If there is a genuine partnership between Whitehall and local authorities over funding then both parties will benefit and so will the general public. In addition there is further work to be done regarding the Housing Revenue Account borrowing cap, despite the adjustments made in the Autumn Statement. If authorities are able to demonstrate affordability and reliability of revenue they should not be limited by an arbitrary figure and need to apply through LEPs for additional borrowing. There is a desperate need to build new affordable homes across the country, not just in the South East, and lifting the cap on HRA borrowing would give us a much greater ability to meet that need.  Leeds has committed to build 70,000 new homes by 2028, and would welcome the granting of greater borrowing capabilities to match the city’s ambition.One concern is the redistributive effect of recent government finance settlements which some authorities perceive to be unfair, particularly as the system no longer directly reflects need. This could be addressed by ministers retaining powers to set the quantum of funding, but appointing an independent commission to distribute that funding between local authorities. &#xa0;Concluding commentsAs we have already noted, the case for the potential economic impact of the further devolution of powers is, in our view, unarguable. The key decision to be made is how devolution can be implemented while retaining sufficient oversight and accountability for the reassurance of Government, and we reiterate our welcome for the Select Committee’s interest in understanding how this can be developed.As the main drivers of the nation’s economy and home to a significant percentage of the population, cities like Leeds have the potential to far exceed their current performance in terms of growth, employment and wellbeing. Under the current centralised system we are stifled from innovation and from addressing local needs effectively. Setting England’s core cities free through fiscal devolution will build upon the successes already made under City Deals and on individual projects, and address the imbalance that currently exists between benefits and costs for local authorities. Leeds City Council would be pleased to offer further evidence or assistance as necessary to the Committee. January 2014&#xa0;