&#xa0;

[[[Submission from]]]

[[[ Staffordshire County Council FDC27]]]It is clear that there is a dramatic shift in the perception of the role which Cities fulfil within the national economy. Historically regarded as focal points for redistributive fiscal policy, city areas are now widely regarded as tired engines of growth. The sheer volume of research, promotion and the realignment of government policy underline this shift. Staffordshire County Council believes that all Cities have much potential to contribute to regional economies on a scale that matches our own contribution. However there is a risk that shifts in policy could undermine wider partners and potentially inhibit localism through the creation of a two speed local government structure. We acknowledge that city areas are currently the toast of policy makers and government ministers, but we would caution against solely city island focus that undermines the impact of peri-urban areas around cities such as Staffordshire, located between 3 such city areas, – relegating them to some sort of ‘hinterland’ status. City areas are an important element in rebalancing the economy, but the advantages and offer is based in part on the impact and support received from peri-urban areas. Peri-urban County areas support city development through peri-urban housing, skills, accessibility and transportation; this contribution must be acknowledged in policy making in a way that recognises that in the case of devolution, peri-urban areas are enabled equally to the empowerment of cities. If not the risk is one of competitive advantage that could undermine economic and spatial development in peri-urban areas, particularly in the ability to attract investment which in turn  will inhibit growth within city areas as the wider region would effectively complement the economic growth that cities deliver. Additionally, as some cities are developing from a potentially low base, and having to address the need to shift their focus from provision of services to economic development, there is also an element of how long it will be before cities act as real drivers of growth, beyond the contribution made by Birmingham, Manchester and London.Fundamentally – the task of empowering cities is an opportunity to empower local government generally, building on the work started by Lord Heseltine and taking the development of Local Enterprise Partnerships to its logical conclusion. Staffordshire County Council isn’t resistant to change or a focus on devolving powers to cities, but rather it should be seen to support peri-urban county areas at the same time.In summary, Staffordshire County Council would like to welcome the developing cities policy as crucial to growth but raise the point that cities are not islands surrounded by economic backwardness and that in general policy devolution and support should be seen as opportunity to empower all local areas at the same time to maximise opportunity. Staffordshire County Council believes that there is an argument that instead of a sole focus on city islands, a greater overall level of devolution be considered in respect of the summary benefits assumed for city areas. However, the problem with ascribing a ‘devolved’ area is that it can imply that the city is key authority – effectively in charge of areas nearby. This undermines localism, local determination and simply passes the top-down approach endured from central government to cities, who by virtue of their elevated status in public debates would be inward looking and less inclined to the cross-border working, partnerships and co-operation that could ensure the benefits of further devolution could affect a wider population. There is also a need to review the logic that focuses policy onto city areas – it seems to assume that economic development within city areas is both guaranteed and sustainable. Whilst Cities are clearly areas that make a substantial contribution to economic growth, the determining factors in that growth is largely absent from the debate. Moreover, the contribution made through peri-urban areas is also largely absent. For example, the areas considered part of a city area – in addition to their relative affluence, economic activity may not actually fall within what we determine a city. Defining boundaries are a key element which to a certain extent should have been reflected by LEPs aligning with functional economic areas, the reality is you cannot serve two masters but can work as equals. An example is the joint working between two LEPs and 3 local authorities over i54 and JLR compared with housing numbers and regional spatial planning.  This would enable a greater focus on travel to work areas, local skills training and the wider supply chain. Neither health services, education nor the business economy respect local government boundaries as lines on a map.However, any degree of devolution opens up a wider debate on the need for a possible re-organisation of local government, which in itself necessitates a review of a proper devolution of powers. Yet the reticence of government and the popular format of cities policy suggest that this won’t take place – creating a problem that cities areas will get a competitive advantage relative to other areas and undermine localism and local accountability. This is especially true with regard to housing – whilst it would be hoped that city areas would focus on regeneration within their defined areas, a wider concern is that the need for city growth would involve development within areas adjoining the city. This would in sum place the burden; cost and impact on other areas yet leave the benefit within a city confine. The notion of complementing devolution is perhaps too far in respect of wider public services – unless wholesale reorganisation within local government is being undertaken, the provision of public goods would still need to develop along the lines of partnership and integration which is already being undertaken. In particular the commissioning of local public services with greater control and adaptation, could present difficulties in adjoining areas in terms of the differences in services and approach. We believe in maximum local discretion but again the development of pockets of devolution that isn’t reflected across the wider local government and public sector would create a level of complexity and potential duplication that would have far reaching consequences.  Additionally it would also undermined a coordinated approach to dealing with areas of deprivation in County areas, especially as currently constructed funding formulas generally lack any impact on rural areas, meaning those County areas with scarce funds have to find innovative ways to deliver services. However we also believe that there is significant learning that can be undertaken from the City Deals the government has implemented. These offer a general model on how individual areas can establish areas of agreement regarding key economic drivers with government. Within the defined boundaries of a city the city council, through its current partnerships and links would be the basis of governance and accountability. In terms of cross-border partnerships, the key element would be to undertake the development of rural-urban partnerships (the OECD has conducted a lot of work on this through the Rural Policy Reviews). These partnerships ensure a balance between the competing development needs of both areas, whilst ensuring that each facilitates the others developments. We would however be opposed to a situation where an area ‘defined’ either by city areas, LEPs or the government would be used to create zones of influence. Again in the context of the difficulties in establishing areas such approaches will have a massive impact on accountability effectively sidelining local councils; furthermore, there is a risk that in such cases, City areas would simply look to acquire influence over areas or zones for development leaving local areas poorer and once again footing the bill for an approach that is skewed toward city areas. &#xa0;We would naturally question any set of data or reports that focuses purely on cities, and would suggest that the evidence can appear quite compelling. However a critical review would raises the query that in some contexts the ‘improvement’ needs to be seen in light of the contribution made by peripheral areas.&#xa0;As we have already highlighted, there is a risk that devolution focused on Cities will simply create a two speed local government. Such devolution would not address flaws within the funding formula that would enable county councils to address rural deprivation, and in all likelihood would lead to a situation where cities would become even more a focus of government policy, leaving surrounding areas as zones of influence to mini-city states and anything beyond as a hinterland. If wider devolution with local government as a whole could not be achieved, then at least the devolutionary arrangements would need to compel city areas to work with wider peripheral areas on a partnership basis. Our preference would be to see a development of our work so far in building stronger partnership foundations, such as those built with Stoke-on-Trent City Council to support the development of the LEP and the City Deal offer to the government. We believe it remains in the County Council’s best interests to work with all Cities both within and around us, just as it is to work directly with the government as well as our peers in other areas. However a comprehensive policy targeted at cities would make that approach more difficult if for no other reason it would effectively change the relationship to one where one was seen as more important relative to the other. &#xa0;Again, any adjustment made to the fiscal devolution to local government would necessitate a review of the constitutional arrangements. But the rebalance of powers and responsibilities would need to be based on an agreement between national and local government. This is logical and doesn’t account for the potential political dimensions that would come in to play, nor does it account for the somewhat legendary opposition that comes from some civil servants. &#xa0;Any attempt at reform on the existing system would need to account for this long term possibility – clearly this would require a long term assessment of where local government is currently and where it is heading in terms of adapting to the realities of public services in a period which will defined by a renegotiation of the social contract between individuals and the state. January 2014&#xa0;