&#xa0;Written evidence from Life Cycle UK (CYS0112)Life Cycle UK believes that cycling is a safe activity in Britain’s towns and cities.  However, we recognise that many people do not feel safe, particularly when they don’t have the skills to cycle in traffic.  Life Cycle does not believe that the answer to improving safety lies in segregating cyclists from cars, although we recognise that on some routes this is appropriate. Life Cycle 15- year experience of delivering cycle training shows that  the provision of high quality  training to people of all ages, can ensure they have the appropriate skills to negotiate traffic safely, understand how to choose routes that have less traffic giving them the confidence to be safe on the roads. &#xa0;Bikeability should be available to children from year 5 onwards, and also available to all secondary school age children.  We believe that children and young people are ready to start cycling at different stages in their development and training should be available to support them at the point when they are ready, not only in Primary School.  Life Cycle trained 650 adults to the National Standard in 2013 to cycle safely on the roads of Bristol enabling them to feel safe and confident to cycle.  However, cycle training is not widely available and is dependent on the priorities of local government. We believe the provision of low-cost high quality adult cycle training should be universally available to adults, wherever they live in England.  &#xa0;Employers should be incentivised to encourage staff who cycle to take up opportunities for training. &#xa0;As part of the standard driving test, and the HGV licence test, we believe that all drivers should be given cyclist awareness training. This needs to increase their understanding of how and why cyclists behave the way they do on the road, and how driver’s should behave correspondingly.  E.g the reasons why a cyclist takes a position in the centre of the lane.               January 2014

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;