&#xa0;

[[[Submission from the British Property Federation (FDC32)]]]&#xa0;This evidence by the British Property Federation has been prepared as a contribution to the Communities and Local Government Select Committee inquiry into whether and how fiscal and financial powers could be devolved to cities and city regions.&#xa0;The British Property Federation (BPF) is the voice of property in the UK, representing companies owning, managing and investing in property. This includes a broad range of businesses – commercial property owners, the financial institutions and pension funds, corporate landlords, local private landlords – as well as all those professions that support the industry. 

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Introduction]]]The BPF strongly supports the principle of devolving greater powers and responsibilities to cities / city regions. We believe that the poor comparative performance of many English cities is due at least in part to the over centralised nature of Government in the UK. Initiatives such as City Deals represent a step in the right direction but much more needs to be done to give our major cities the degree of initiative and the level of resources that will enable them to fulfil their potential as  drivers of growth. The predominant feeling within the property sector is that many in central Government are still reluctant to let go and give cities their head. This is in stark contrast to the greater autonomy, particularly fiscal autonomy, enjoyed by many competitor cities elsewhere in Europe.  We believe that those running cities, working in partnership with business and other interest groups, are best place to understand local needs – for instance on matters such as infrastructure and skills - and have the drive and commitment to carry through appropriate programmes   to address them 

[[[The underperformance of English cities]]]A  series  of research reports over the last decade  has highlighted the underperformance of English cities in comparison with their international  peers including those in Europe.  In his 2004 report, ‘Competitive European Cities: Where do the Core Cities Stand?’,  Professor Michael   Parkinson  said that ‘It is clear that, despite their relative renaissance in recent years, the Core Cities still lag behind their European counterparts in terms of competitiveness.’  Although he was at pains to stress that there are important variations within the UK Core Cities and that many had improved their performance his overall message was stark: UK cities do not punch their economic weight in a European context. They lag significantly behind many of their European continental counterparts in areas such as  innovation, workforce qualifications, connectivity, employment rates, social composition and attractiveness to the private sector. This is made worse by the fact that European cities do not punch their weight globally.Another report in 2006, The Competitive Economic Performance of English Cities, by Oxford Brookes University and others also highlighted the uncompetitiveness of English cites.The latest UK Competitiveness Index for 2013 also points to a growing divergence between the best and least well perfoming areas in the UK, the best areas being almost exclusively in London and the South East.Whilst many of the core cities have made real progress since 2004 the long economic recession that the country has suffered for much of the last decade means that many of the   fundamental problems  of competitiveness highlighted by Professor Parkinson ad others remain to be tackled.

[[[Would greater devolution of fiscal powers help?]]]Tackling uncompetitiveness is, of course, a highly complex issue and there is no simple answer. However,  one contributory factor that has been consistently been  raised by those who have looked at this issue is the over centralisation of decision making and fiscal control in the UK  in contrast to the greater autonomy enjoyed by many  more successful cities in Europe and elsewhere. This it is often suggested detracts from the ability of cities / city regions to   frame policies and set priorities best  suited to the needs of their areas. The trend in continental Europe has been to decentralise and regionalise decision-making, placing powers at the lowest level. As a result, continental cities have responsibility for a wider range of functions which affect their economic competitiveness than do their UK counterparts. Professor Parkinson summed up the position as follows:Continental cities typically have more diverse forms of local revenue and more buoyant tax bases, which make them less fiscally dependent upon the national state and more proactive in their development strategies. Many European cities have powerful elected mayors who give clear leadership to economic development. Many successful cities have been deeply involved in European systems and networks, which has encouraged them to beinternationalist, expansionist and entrepreneurial. The mix varies but it is difficult todisagree with the view that their combination of powers and resources make continentalcities more proactive, more entrepreneurial and probably more competitive. The mostsuccessful cities in Europe remain German. They have substantial powers and resources and operate in the most decentralised national system. UK cities arguably have fewer powers, resources and responsibilities than their competitors and have been less engaged in the European project. And they have been less successful economically. The more centralised governmental, institutional, and financial system must be one dimension of theunderperformance of UK cities. The policy implication is not a short term one. But it isclear. Letting go achieves more.&#xa0;The Oxford Brookes report also concluded that more autonomy would be helpful:Urban economic governance is weak and relatively ineffective in England. In order for the cities themselves to respond more effectively to the framework conditions set by national government they need be given more power and freedom to introduce new institutional structures tailored to the speciﬁc economic needs of their local economies. This could include the freedom to reform local government institutions in order to make them more dynamic and increase their capacity for long-term strategic decision making.&#xa0;The most recent report to address this issue, albeit in a London context, was ‘Raising the Capital’, issued in May 2013 by the London Finance Commission. Although the Commission felt that academic evidence about the impact of devolving fiscal powers on economic growth was inconclusive it highlighted (using work commissioned from the University of Toronto)  the very low levels of fiscal autonomy enjoyed by UK cities compared with those in other countries. The report concluded that London would benefit from having more revenue streams under its control.&#xa0;

[[[The view o]]]

[[[f the BPF]]]The predominant view within the property industry is that strong local leadership and initiative are essential to taking forward a long-term vision for a city / city region. However the ambition and enthusiasm of civic leaders and other local leaders is being stymied by a continuing reluctance within central Government to relinquish control. There is a strong desire within the sector to move away from what has aptly been dubbed the ‘infantilisation’ of local government.   Over the last year the BPF has held a number of high level roundtables in major cities around the country including Manchester, Liverpool and Birmingham which have brought together leading local figures in the property industry and leaders of local government.  The aim was to explore barriers to economic growth and development and ways of overcoming them.There was a remarkable degree of cross-sector support for the principle of devolving greater powers to cities / city regions.  Among the key messages were: &#xa0;&#xa0;As already mentioned, the case for greater devolution was recently explored by the London Finance Commission in  its report, ‘Raising the Capital’ . Although the report was London specific many of the arguments put forward are just as relevant to other cities.  Indeed it could be argued that the need for greater autonomy is even greater in other cities as London is such a major global force that it has the capacity to thrive even in the absence of greater autonomy.  &#xa0;Picking up some of the themes discussed in that report &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;9 January 2014&#xa0;