&#xa0;Written evidence submitted by Mark Ryan&#xa0;1. My name is Mark Ryan and I am a Senior Lecturer in Constitutional and Administrative Law at Coventry University. My submission, however, is made in my personal capacity and indicates my brief personal observations in respect of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011. It in no way reflects the views of my employer (Coventry University). &#xa0;2. At the outset the point must be made that the enactment of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011 is to be welcomed as providing a degree of certainty to the date of parliamentary elections and in doing so reducing executive power in the United Kingdom’s uncodified constitutional arrangements. In addition, the Act will allow for a more structured approach to the legislative process.   &#xa0;3. In order to ensure that the final year of the Parliament includes a substantive and viable legislative programme, two points could be made. Firstly, Government Bills scheduled to form part of the 2014-15 session should be issued in draft in early 2014 in order that the principal elements of these measures can be examined and scrutinised well in advance of them being introduced as fully fledged Bills.  As an aside, the publication of Bills in draft should be standard legislative practice in any event.  Secondly (and as a caveat to the above), the content of any Bill scheduled for the 2014-15 session should not be too party politically controversial or indeed contain any major constitutional reform proposals.&#xa0;4. One key advantage of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act is, of course, that it should dispense with the ‘wash up’ and allow for legislation to be carefully scheduled  (at least in the House of Commons) and so enable appropriate and adequate scrutiny to take place of each element of every Bill.  In terms of select committees, they will also be able to plan and co-ordinate the gathering and marshalling of written and oral evidence in the light of a more organised and predictable legislative programme.&#xa0;5. It is arguable that if there had not been a Conservative–Liberal Democrat Coalition Government, then the detail of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act might have been different.  In particular, it could be posited that the key provision of section 1 may well have been a term of four years as opposed to five in the Act. A four year term would arguably have fitted in more with the existing structure of our constitutional arrangements (viz., devolution/ local government and the practical reality of the length of recent parliamentary terms).            &#xa0;6. Finally, it is earnestly hoped that the report that this select committee will publish in due course on the Fixed-term Parliaments Act will be considered carefully by the committee to be set up in 2020 which will undertake a review of the operation of the Act (having been set up by the Prime Minister in 2020 in accordance with section 7).&#xa0;12 January  2014. &#xa0;&#xa0;