&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by David ]]]

[[[Elstein]]]

[[[ [FBB0104]]]]&#xa0;Hearings on BBC January 14 2014I want to cover four topics this morning: governance, culture, scope and funding.However, I want to preface my remarks with an acknowledgement. Most of us – either giving evidence to this committee or perhaps serving on it – believe that the BBC can be improved. But in the absence of unanimity as to what to do or how to do it, it is incumbent on us to recognize that the BBC works reasonably well, and that most changes to the way it is organised and operated would make only a marginal difference. We tend to take the BBC for granted, yet the sheer scale of its achievements in the nine decades of its existence must command our respect. It is by far the major source of news for UK citizens (as well as for many millions beyond Britain), it is our leading cultural institution, it is a key provider of information, educational material and entertainment, and it has created an unrivalled archive of content of great permanent value. That the BBC has survived major upheavals, dismissals of leading executives and intermittent changes in structure suggests that it matters little which actual people are running the organisation: the thousands of dedicated professionals working within the BBC, and their core commitment to its inherited values, ensure that the many benefits the BBC delivers to us are largely immune to surface turmoil.1)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; GovernanceThat said, I have no doubt that the governance system set up at the last Charter review could be improved. The confusion as to who is in control of the BBC’s finances was amply demonstrated by the lamentable public humiliation of past and present members of the BBC Trust and BBC Executive Board at the September 9th session of the Public Accounts Committee.Poor communication, ambiguity in relationships, and lack of clarity as to responsibilities were all on display that day. In truth, the argument between the two sides was relatively minor – had a few million pounds worth of extra-contractual payments to departing executives been approved properly or not? – but the degree of mutual exasperation expressed betrayed structural problems, not just personal ones (as the PAC chair tellingly noted).Replacing the old BBC Governors with the BBC Trust, and allowing the Director-General to chair his own Executive Board (something that would never be tolerated in the commercial world), left the so-called oversight body under-informed and too far from the action, whilst allowing too much scope to a single executive. The governance structure at Channel Four seems substantially preferable: a combined board of executives and non-executives, in equal numbers, but with non-executives in the roles of chair and deputy chair.Like all other UK-licensed broadcasters, Channel 4 is regulated by Ofcom, which also regulates some activities of the BBC. It seems to me that there would be significant benefit in allowing Ofcom further scope in regulating the BBC, most notably in judging complaints about impartiality (it already judges complaints on all other content matters) and monitoring the BBC’s fair trading obligations.It is frustrating for viewers and listeners to find that for a single programme broadcast by the BBC, they might need to complain to two different regulators – for instance, to Ofcom on fairness and the BBC Trust on impartiality. It also seems wasteful to ignore Ofcom’s accumulated expertise in judging content issues in favour of allowing the Trust to persist with certain matters. In terms of rigged competitions and misuse of premium rate telephone calls, Ofcom proved more astute and rigorous than the Trust in assessing identical material. 2)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; CultureThe PAC hearings, like the Pollard report a year earlier, revealed failings in the BBC’s corporate culture which were disturbing. In terms of repairing the journalistic reputation of the BBC after the Savile and McAlpine mishaps, the appointments of Lord Hall and James Harding offer some encouragement. However, as Lord Hall himself remarked as the severances affair, there was a danger that the BBC had lost the plot in operational terms, and allowed an officer class to emerge, to the detriment of staff morale.There was some telling moments at the PAC hearings. At one point, former Director-General Mark Thompson, in trying to justify the excess severance payments to his deputy, Mark Byford, pointed to the amounts paid to his successor, George Entwistle, that were authorised by the Trust. After all, said Thompson, Entwistle’s entitlement when he resigned was to just six months’ pay, not the twelve months he received. In point of fact, Entwistle had no entitlement to any pay-off: he announced his resignation, based on significant failures of leadership. Indeed, the Trust’s chairman praised his “honourable” decision. No cheque was needed.Indeed, the chairman, Lord Patten, remarked to the PAC that all BBC executives were over-paid, compared to the most important cultural executive in the UK, Neil McGregor of the British Museum, who receives £180,000 a year. Immediately after the PAC hearings, former chairman Lord Grade appeared on Newsnight to state that the BBC had little sense of the value of money, because it received a guaranteed £3.6 billion a year, thanks to the licence fee.Lord Hall has announced his intention to cut back on executive numbers and benefits, as well as the committee structure that prevails in the BBC; and we must wish him well. An early test will be the salary he chooses to offer to replace the departing Director of Human Resources, Lucy Adams, whose current salary is £320,000 a year: or 1.8 McGregors.3)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; ScopeTwo of the most senior figures working in BBC journalism – David Dimbleby and the recently departed Director of News, Roger Mosey – have both recently suggested that the BBC may be too large for its own good (and ours).Their remarks have been construed as calling for a reduction in the number of BBC TV channels, or some other curtailment of scope, which has earned a certain level of support from some of the BBC’s competitors, most notably the commercial radio companies.This is not a new debate. The launch of new domestic TV channels has been subjected to considerable ministerial scrutiny, to limit – if not entirely prevent – impact on existing players. Executives at Channel 4 were heard to remark that if the launch of BBC3 was designed to attract more young adults to television, it would make more sense to hand the new channel’s budget to Channel 4, which had an established track record in appealing to those viewers.Likewise, a proposal to launch local TV stations was vetoed by the BBC Trust, which has also imposed limits on the extent of the BBC’s online activities. Yet the BBC’s ability to flex its muscles, even within the constraints imposed by the Trust and by ministers, inevitably causes problems, as the commercial radio sector regularly complains.Does the BBC have too many channels? In truth, with BBC 3 and BBC 4 only available in the evenings, and with BBC2 confined to repeats in daytime – other than when it is offering live broadcasts – the scale of the BBC’s television offerings is more show than substance. Indeed, when Lord Hall launches a +1 service for BBC1, he will further enlarge the nominal number of hours of transmission, without delivering a single additional programme. Yet the appearance of growing scope and scale can in itself be dangerous, especially when there is a real and serious issue in a key area.That area is news consumption. I have raised this point with the parallel committee in another place, so I will not re-run all the numbers. The fact is that the BBC is responsible for over 60% of all news consumption by UK adults, a figure that edges higher year by year, as newspaper readership declines and TV news consumption shifts steadily away from ITV and towards the BBC. It is likely that by the end of the decade the BBC will account for more than twice as much news consumption as all other sources combined.There are many reasons for this phenomenon, including the declining emphasis placed on news by the BBC’s TV competitors. As the BBC correctly points out, it is responsible for barely one quarter of all TV news hours actually broadcast, but nearly three quarters of all TV news viewed: there is clearly consumer preference at work.Ofcom has acknowledged that BBC dominance is a serious issue affecting news plurality in the UK. It has called on the Trust to make internal plurality a priority, but received no response. I have described to their Lordships how such plurality might be accomplished, but – again – there appears to be little interest within the BBC.4)&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; FundingCorrecting the faults I have described in the first three topics would entail very little actual change in the BBC, in terms of operations and structure. However, I have long been an advocate of a more direct funding mechanism for the BBC than the licence fee, in the shape of voluntary subscription, the adoption of which would indeed have a major impact on the way the BBC operated.The changes I foresee are that the BBC television offering would become more varied, with viewers offered a choice of channels and packages; that this would create an incentive for the BBC to offer more “premium” product, such as high-cost drama, sport, arts and documentaries, so as to tap into the well-established audience demand for these categories; that subscribing would be entirely voluntary, but that a subscriber would need to enable each TV set separately, thereby enlarging the BBC’s total number of licensed units whilst allowing the unit price of a single-set subscription to the current suite of BBC channels to be reduced.Under this scenario, the BBC would become directly accountable to its subscribers – it might even adopt some form of mutual or membership structure; it would cease to be dependent on politicians to set its income; it could borrow more readily in the debt markets and so invest more heavily in its commercial ventures; its reach would decline somewhat, perhaps by 10-20%, but its income would rise; the VAT generated from its subscriber charges might be used to launch a contestable public service content fund; it would still be required to spend 20% of its income on free-to-air radio services; and it would undergo a significant shift of its programming priorities away from sheer volume towards higher quality.I have separately submitted to the Committee a chapter in a forthcoming book dealing with the licence fee issue, so I will not add to the reading burden by replicating that discussion. However, I would only mention one piece of evidence submitted by the BBC, to the effect that, since 2004, public preference appears to have shifted away from subscription towards the licence fee.Of course, 2004 was the last time subscription was widely discussed as an option for the BBC, in the run up to the last Charter review. The Broadcasting Policy Group booklet “Beyond The Charter” set out the argument at length. The committee chaired by Lord Burns, set up by Secretary of State Tessa Jowell, also recommended shifting from the licence towards subscription as the best way of funding the BBC. I personally participated in a live Panorama programme that year where the studio audience clearly opted for subscription (the case for the licence fee was made by the acting Director-General).Since then, of course, there has been almost complete silence about any alternative to the licence fee, not least on the BBC, which – see above – is responsible for such a vast share of UK news consumption. Instead, the BBC has devoted itself to making the arguments for the licence fee, good and bad. I am, therefore, not much impressed by the research cited, and am confident that a properly conducted public debate would result in a very different outcome.January  2014 &#xa0;