&#xa0;

[[[W]]]

[[[ritten evidence submitted by]]]

[[[ t]]]

[[[he Royal Society for the Protection of Birds]]]The order and content of this contribution reflect the terms of reference of the inquiry:&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 

[[[The principal drivers of the rising number of invasive species.]]]Trade is the single most important pathway for the introduction of invasive non-native species (INNS). The growth in international trade and human transport – especially since the 1950s – is therefore a key driver of the growth in INNS. The principal factors are:&#xa0;The likelihood of establishment of INNS is known to be determined by 

[[[propagule]]]

[[[ pressure]]] – the number of individuals arriving at a new site. It is a common misconception that to prevent INNS establishment every single organism must be stopped or there is no point. Action that reduces the number of individuals (or seeds, growing fragments, eggs) being introduced can be highly effective at preventing problems, even if some individuals are still being released. Other forms of human movement besides trade and transport play significant roles, e.g. ballast water movements, hull fouling, forestry, species movement for collections, etc.The effect of increasing human movement of species is compounded by environmental factors - climate change and biodiversity loss in particular. Rising CO2 concentrations, warmer temperatures, greater nitrogen deposition, altered disturbance regimes and increased habitat degradation are all known to facilitate further species invasions.  

[[[The adequacy of understanding and data on invasive species, and the extent of the harm they cause, to be able to devise strategies to address them.]]]Scientific understanding of INNS issues generally has significantly improved in recent decades, with invasion science now a recognised and growing discipline. Moreover, practical experience in combating INNS issues around the world has developed significantly, with an array of successful prevention, rapid response, major eradication and long term control initiatives.  The UK has a number of active research groups but is not at present one of the world’s principal centres of expertise in academic invasion science. Some general patterns of invasion are well understood and should be clear targets for action: for example, introducing non-native vertebrates to islands, or freshwater fish and crayfish to aquatic systems, will nearly always prove damaging and must be prevented or subject to rapid response action as a matter of high priority. Predicting invasions can sometimes be challenging, however, as there is a degree of intrinsic uncertainty: predicting which species will become invasive, and what effect they will have on ecosystems is often less than 100% precise. Risk Assessment should be conducted and interpreted in that context, and should be a dynamic exercise that builds on new understanding and experience. Specific uncertainties must not, however, hinder the establishment of general prevention and rapid response capacities, as these will be fundamental to constructing an adequate future response to INNS.Public understanding of INNS issues is often limited. This can generate difficulties when communicating and reporting on INNS issues, and when seeking public engagement – which will often be critical with respect to preventing introductions – and in promoting vigilance and early warning capacity. Public communications and awareness campaigns on INNS – key elements of an effective response - should focus on the idea that careless species movements cause problems, and that we must all remain vigilant. Most importantly, government and agencies must ensure that surveillance mechanisms are adequate to inform effective rapid response capacity, particularly for areas of high vulnerability (islands, freshwater bodies, river catchments) and high biodiversity value (protected areas). The precautionary principle and the economies that will arise from early action point to the benefits of a general presumption against the introduction of non native species and that action must be taken at the earliest invasion stage possible. We believe there are currently some important shortcomings with regard to surveillance in vulnerable areas, notably un-invaded river catchments, lakes and protected areas, and in terms of training of front-line professionals in INNS identification and action.&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 

[[[The adequacy of the draft EU Regulation and its relevance to the situation in the UK]]]The INNS issue is fundamentally an international one. In a trading block such as the EU, if one Member State fails to implement adequate measures to prevent and combat INNS, the whole Union is put at risk. The growing number of biological invasions hitting EU countries, the risk of rapid spread and the wide spectrum of species and impacts requires a legal framework for coordinated action, for the benefit of all.Domestic arrangements with respect to INNS across EU member states are currently inadequate, with the result that national Governments are having to spend significant amounts of money to tackle the problems on their own. Worryingly, there are no means to ensure that neighbouring countries take parallel measures in order to prevent new invasions of the same or similar species. This is true even for island states such as the UK, where the number of INNS present, relative to area and human population, does not differ significantly from continental states in Europe.The European Commission’s draft Regulation on invasive alien species, published in September 2013, is therefore a significant positive step. It is currently undergoing the co-decision process in the European Parliament and Council. Conservation NGOs welcomed the EC proposal initially but warned that it contained some key shortcomings that need to be addressed for an appropriate and environmentally sound legislation:&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Specific ]]]

[[[ToR]]]

[[[ issues:]]]Establishing a list of invasive alien species of EU concern is a potentially effective tool. However, limiting this ‘blacklist’ to 50 species only, as proposed by the European Commission, has no scientific basis. The arbitrary figure represents only 3% of the INNS estimated to already be present in the EU and, with a demonstrably growing problem,  is clearly inadequate in scope: moreover, to be effective, the list should include species not yet present in Europe, that pose a significant risk – so notional coverage will be considerably less than 3% of the potential problem.The original justification for proposing an arbitrary cap on the number of species was economic, yet it failed to take into account that most savings occur in the early stages of invasion. We strongly support the UK Government’s position that the cap should be lifted.It would be wrong to see biodiversity impacts and socio-economic impacts as independent. INNS are a one of the principal drivers of biodiversity loss, and that loss impacts human welfare and economy through eroding the array ecosystem services on which people and economies depend. Moreover, specific INNS problems that are costly to the economy are often similarly costly in terms of native biodiversity. Risk Assessment is and will be a key tool in identifying potential and forthcoming problems, but it should always be interpreted with acknowledgement of a degree of intrinsic uncertainty, varying between taxa and environments. The broad patterns that we can have high confidence in should naturally help us prioritise action: islands, freshwater bodies (including rivers) and areas of high biodiversity importance should be a focus.The Convention on Biological Diversity provides some Guiding Principles for the prevention, introduction and mitigation of impacts of alien species that threaten ecosystems, habitats or species. The priority should be given to preventing the introduction of invasive alien species, between and within States. If an invasive alien species has been introduced, early detection and rapid action are crucial to prevent its establishment. The preferred response is often to eradicate the organisms as soon as possible. In the event that rapid eradication is not feasible, containment and longer-term control or eradication measures should be implemented. Assessments of benefits and costs (environmental, economic and social) should be done on a long-term basis.The list of species of Union concern should be prospective and preventative – it should prioritise the listing of those potential invaders that have not become established in the EU and of those which, being present in one or several Member States, can still be prevented from further damaging spread. For these species, actions coordinated under appropriately resourced management plans in the countries where they are established should be implemented.  The three ‘strands of response’, first laid out in the Convention on Biological Diversity and widely adopted subsequently, are intended to enshrine and facilitate a general principle in combating INNS impacts: 

[[[that action should be taken at the ]]]

[[[earliest invasion stage ]]]

[[[possible]]]

[[[.]]] The later action is taken, the more expensive it is in both financial and ecological terms. Thus, establishing effective mechanisms for prevention and early warning/rapid response makes great sense. It would be a fundamental mistake, however, to assume that if prevention does not happen, it is too late to do anything. Attempting to strategically weight resource deployment broadly across these strands would prove challenging and would be likely to miss some key issues. The key word is balance. For some well-established INNS, long-term control/containment must be a priority to avoid further damage to native biodiversity and economic interests – grey squirrels, for example. If national strategy does this at the expense of establishing effective preventative and rapid response capacities, however, we will be risking heavy future expense and ecosystem damage from more recently arrived species.A list of safe species (‘White Listing’) – given our imperfect knowledge of species and community ecology, and the intrinsic uncertainties around predicting future problems – is undoubtedly the safest and best response to addressing issues of species movements. It should be the approach adopted in the longer term. However, these uncertainties mean that any list of species proven to be safe is likely to be relatively short, the regulatory burden on trade and commerce would accordingly be relatively heavy, and so this is a politically challenging approach in the context of our current state of knowledge - achieving consensus may be impossible. In this perspective, a ‘black list’ approach (regulating species known or likely to be damaging) is in our view an acceptable, if sub-optimal, approach until improved knowledge facilitates a practical white listing mechanism. However, a cap on the number of species that can be listed under a black listing approach would undermine its potential efficacy so severely that it would become too weak to tackle the INNS problem significantly.The key potential conflict at present involves the new Biocidal Products Regulation (arising from the Biocidal Products Directive  98/8/EEC) which severely restricts the usage of second generation anticoagulant rodenticides (SGARs).  These regulations are a welcome environmental safeguard generally, but it is imperative that derogation from these regulations is, when necessary for island restoration projects (which aim to eradicate non-native rodents from islands), simple, effective, and without financial burden. When introduced onto islands, rodents are among the most damaging INNS on earth – biodiversity losses historically have been severe and remedial action (island restoration via rodent eradication) must be a core priority in the UK and elsewhere.Island restoration projects are an essential tool for delivering international conservation obligations. HSE have confirmed that limiting SGAR use for such projects is an unintended consequence of the new system. At present, however, the Biocidal Products Regulation would appear to be an obstacle and significant risk to this important conservation work.The RSPB is in discussion with the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) in this regard, but our experience to date indicates that the process of obtaining a derogation will be time-consuming and costly and not necessarily fit for purpose (particularly if reinvasion occurs).We urge the Government to introduce a revised system for approving rodenticide use for island restoration projects carried out by recognised conservation bodies, and under strict protocols for the benefit of our wildlife.The establishment in 2008 of the Invasive Non-native Species Framework Strategy for Great Britain was a welcome expression of Government intent to tackle the problems caused by INNS and to prevent the establishment and further spread of new populations. It has positioned GB as a leader in the field in a number of key areas  - for example, the risk assessment methodology devised/used in GB has been selected by the European Commission as a model for the Union.  However, in other areas, progress has been slow, and it is vital that, irrespective of developments at EU level, Defra and the GB Non-native Species Secretariat make full use of the opportunity provided by the current GB Strategy review to make further improvements.   The new strategy must invest more in identifying and tackling pathways of invasion, ensuring appropriate rapid response mechanisms are in place, and shifting emphasis from risk assessment (though still clearly required) to risk management – i.e. prioritising and then undertaking action to tackle particular species, which otherwise appears to take place in a rather haphazard and frequently opaque fashion.  The UK Government has proposed the following amendment to the European Commission draft text – (Art. 7(4)): “Member States may maintain or lay down more stringent national rules with the aim of preventing the introduction, establishment and spread of invasive alien species”.  The RSPB supports this amendment and urges the Government to bring forward plans to reform domestic law and not wait for or be limited by the EU process (see 8 below). The key potential benefit for the UK in the current proposal is that it would help to bring our EU trading partners up to a standard that approaches that in the UK. The UK should instigate a strategic programme of INNS remedial actions, make full use of the proposed Lists of MS Concern, should encourage public awareness campaigns and training for workers in key pathway roles, and should invest (and encourage the EU to invest) in scientific INNS research to facilitate a progression towards a genuinely sustainable position, where INNS establishment rates and damaging impacts decline.UK Overseas Territories:The draft EU IAS Regulation will not cover the UK Overseas Territories (OTs). Invasive species are however one of the primary drivers of biodiversity loss on the Territories, and the UK strategy must include recognition of these overlooked and vulnerable environments. At present, new species continue to arrive and spread in the Territories, with in many cases no surveillance or monitoring. There are also weaknesses in legislation, implementation and technical expertise, with some Territories having particularly pressing gaps - e.g. Pitcairn has no biosecurity legislation, whilst Tristan da Cunha lacks a secure facility for the inspection and destruction of high-risk goods. Many Territories are unable to fill the gaps in their biosecurity systems without external support. At present, Defra supports a Pest Identification Service for the OTs, which is of considerable proven value for these small jurisdictions and must be continued. There is an urgent need for a much more proactive and strategic approach however. The UK should assist Territories with assessing and addressing the pathways for the importation of new species, and provide them with further technical and financial support to address the most pressing gaps in biosecurity frameworks. The GB Non-Native Species Programme Board, meanwhile, should be directed to provide more proactive support to the OTs.We support the promotion of domestic production to minimise the need for species importation to the UK. Specific measures should prioritise minimising imports of organisms (eg amphibians and plants, especially trees), that – though the species concerned may be native to the UK – may carry pathogens that are not established in UK populations. 

[[[The case for any change in the law regarding invasive species.]]]The case for reform of the legislation relating to invasive non-native species (INNS) in England and Wales is compelling.  INNS are one of the principal causes of species extinctions and one of the five main drivers of global biodiversity loss, alongside habitat change, climate change, overexploitation and pollution.  Despite this, and their estimated cost to the UK economy of £1.7 billion annually, it is widely acknowledged that the existing legislative framework relating to INNS in England and Wales is inadequate to deal with this escalating issue.  The inclusion of INNS in the recent Law Commission review of wildife management law in England and Wales was therefore timely.Some serious omissions under the existing statutory provisions need urgent correction.  For example, firstly the functional definition of ‘non-native’ (as found in s14(1)) of the Wildlife And Countryside Act 1981) currently omits species that are native to one part of Great Britain and that are released in, or escape to, areas where they are not native (e.g hedgehogs on islands, and resulting impacts on ground-nesting birds).  Secondly, the current statutory provisions fail to prevent future problem introductions, and fail to provide adequate regulatory tools to control, contain or eradicate species already established (criminal offences such as those in s14(1) only deal with the "horse after it has bolted").  We believe that INNS legislation should take the approach of broad regulation of release of non-native species, coupled with listed exempt circumstances and activities.  Such measures should be combined with a duty on (named) public bodies to investigate and instigate control measures on the most dangerous INNS.  Lines of responsibility must be determined within statute – without this, the ability to act quickly and decisively at the earliest stage of invasion will be severely hampered, and costly delays will ensue.  The law should specify:Much progress has been made in Scotland through the Wildlife and Natural Environment Act (2011), which places Scotland at the forefront of EU action to tackle INNS, thanks to the pioneering provisions it contains.  We strongly support the precautionary approach adopted by the Scottish Government, which underpins a general no-release principle in relation to non-native species, irrespective of whether or not they are known to be invasive.&#xa0;We also consider that use of existing legal provisions could be more extensive and urgently used.  For example we welcome the  ban on sale of invasive aquatic plants (under s14Z(a) of  the WCA 1981 but note that this is only for 5 species (the original consultation considered many more) and the ban has taken a significant length of time to introduce.  We believe that the Scottish legislative arrangements of INNS are among the best in the EU and urge the adoption of equivalent measures in the other UK countries. We also commend the Scottish Government’s Code of Practice on INNS, approved by the Scottish Parliament, which accompanies the recent legislation. In particular, this specifies explicitly the roles and responsibilities of the relevant public bodies and agencies with regard to INNS. Uncertainty in this regard has been a widespread cause of delay and confusion in our responses to INNS, and is pre-requisite to establishing effective Rapid Response decision-making and action. One shortcoming in the Scottish legislation is the explicit exclusion from any regulation of non-native game birds (pheasants and red-legged partridges). These species are known in some instances, notably at very high density release sites, to cause damage to native wildlife, and a degree of regulatory control in problem areas is needed.&#xa0;

[[[Case studies]]]

[[[Ruddy Duck]]] (Oxyura jamaicensis) – Ruddy ducks are native to North America and, like white-headed ducks (Oxyura leucocephala), are a member of the stifftail family. They were brought to the UK in the 1930s and 1940s for captive wildfowl collections. Escapees first bred in the wild in 1952, and by 2000 the UK population numbered 6,000 birds. They would not have made it here, however, without the action of humans. International conservation organisations and European governments believe that hybridisation poses a very serious threat to the survival of the white-headed duck. The UK supported the largest population of wild-living ruddy ducks in Europe, and so it was vital that action was, and continues to be, taken to remove the source of birds reaching the continent. The UK and Spain (which has an important population of the globally threatened white-headed duck) have been leading work on controlling ruddy ducks.  Other European countries with small feral populations of ruddy ducks, such as France and the Netherlands, must also play their part in addressing this threat to the white-headed duck.

[[[Ash dieback]]] (Chalara fraxinea) – Ash die-back is a disease that has caused widespread damage to ash trees across Europe. The disease is caused by a fungus which was first recorded in Poland in the 1990s from where it has rapidly spread north and west across Europe. The disease was first reported in the UK in a plant nursery in February 2012, in a consignment of ash trees imported from the Netherlands. Subsequent checks revealed a number of other infections, mostly among nursery imports but also in a number of newly-planted sites. In October 2012 the Forestry Commission announced the first confirmed cases of the disease in mature ash trees not associated with any new planting. Unfortunately, there is currently no known cure for this disease. Research in Europe has shown that some ash trees are more resistant to the disease than others, and that there is some degree of natural resistance. Work is now underway in the UK to identify those trees with the highest degrees of resistance to help generate replacement stock, should trees be lost. On 29 October 2012 the UK Government also introduced new legislation to ban the import of ash plants, trees and seeds. The legislation also bans the movements of ash trees and seeds within the UK.

[[[American mink]]] (Neovison vison) – The American mink is a non-native species, introduced to the UK in 1929 from North America for fur farming. In the 1960s, there were 700 fur farms. Fur farming has been banned in the UK since the beginning of 2003. Deliberate releases and escapes of farmed mink resulted in the establishment of feral populations in many parts of the UK, with consequent impacts on native wildlife, such as water voles and seabirds, particularly terns. The available scientific data confirms that mink predation has depleted populations of some bird species - at least at local level. It is unlikely that mink can be eradicated from the UK mainland without expensive and intensive effort. However, control may be appropriate on a local, targeted basis, where mink are having a negative impact on important bird populations. The Hebridean Mink Eradication programme demonstrates that significant progress to reduce the impacts of INNS can be made on a large scale, where there are sufficient levels of ambition and support. &#xa0;13 January 2014&#xa0;&#xa0; Miller, C., Kettunen, M. &amp; Shine, C. 2006. Scope options for EU action on invasive alien species (IAS) Final report for the European Commission. Institute for European Environmental Policy (IEEP), Brussels. Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Biodiversity Synthesis. World Resources Institute, Washington, DC. http://www.millenniumassessment.org/documents/document.354.aspx.pdf  The Economic Cost of Invasive Non-native Species to the British Economy.&#xa0; CABI 2010.&#xa0; Eg Sage, R. B., Ludolf, C. &amp; Robertson, P. A. 2005. The ground flora of ancient semi-natural woodlands in pheasant release pens in England. Biological Conservation 

[[[122]]]: 243-252.