&#xa0;

[[[Written Evidence Submitted by Lisa Riley (PhD, MSc, MRes, MSc, BSc (Hons))]]]&#xa0;

[[[Executive Summary]]]&#xa0;

[[[Personal Background]]]I am a primatologist currently working as an independent consultant in animal welfare and as a part-time lecturer in Higher Education Animal Management at Sparsholt College Hampshire (UK).Previously (2011-2012) I held the position Senior Scientific Officer (Captive Wild Animals), Wildlife Department, RSPCA where I set up a rehoming project in association with Monkey World Ape Rescue Centre (Dorset, UK) to rehome the increasing number of UK pet primates rescued by the RSPCA.  I have worked as a Primate Keeper at Colchester Zoo (Essex, UK), and as an independent consultant have worked with zoos and sanctuaries in the UK and Europe advising on education, enrichment and campaigns relating to the keeping of primates. The opinions expressed in this submission are my own and should not be considered as the opinion of any establishment for/with which I have worked. &#xa0;

[[[Evidence]]]The exotic pet industry in the UK is a growing industry that involves the trade and private keeping of a wide range of both wild-caught and captive-bred mammals, marsupials, birds, fish, reptiles, amphibians and invertebrates. The UK pet primate industry is one facet of this wider exotics industry. The number and species of primates kept in the UK is unknown, partly due to a lack of regulation and partly due to a lack of enforcement of existing legislation. Commonly kept species (like common marmosets, pygmy marmosets and numerous tamarin species) are excluded from the Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976 (and associated (Modification) (No. 2) Order 2007). This Act is ineffectively enforced, with non-compliance reported to be 85-95%. Thus frequently kept species like capuchin monkeys, the keeping of which requires a licence, are often kept without a licence.   Without a national survey of pet keeping numbers will only ever be estimates and thus the proportion of pet primates being kept well and those who are neglected or abused remains unquantifiable. However, it is clear that the total number of pet primates in the UK requiring rescue and rehoming has increased. The amount of resource (money, hours of work, projects initiated and research undertaken) animal welfare charities and professionals are investing into rehoming pet primates and prosecuting unknowledgeable, neglectful owners is escalating. I believe that this increase is due in part to internet trade. Evidence of both private sales (through classified sites) and commercial sales from specialist online pet shops is abundant. Simply Google search “marmoset for sale”. These sales raise concern about current legislation. The Pet Animals Act 1951 refers to a pet shop premises and when I have dealt with local authorities in the past some have expressed confusion as to whether online pet shops require a licence because they do not sell from a physical premises. Private sales are of course exempt from licensing currently. Internet trade not only increases the accessibility of owning a pet primate, making such ownership easily attainable for many, but it fuels the spread of erroneous information and poor practice. The industry is currently peppered with owners who do not understand the complex needs of their pet primate(s). Primates require complex physical and social environments, specialist veterinary care and many, like marmosets, have specific dietary requirements (both in terms of the type of food and the presentation). They are susceptible to physical and psychological abnormality and have the cognitive capacity to suffer profoundly when their needs are not met. Concerning the rescues in which I have been involved even basic requirements are not understood by owners. For example, owners have failed to provide vitamin D3 supplement. Consequently their pet primate has developed metabolic bone disease leading to permanent bone deformity. Owners also misunderstand the need for company, even those who reference the DEFRA Code of Practice for the Welfare of Privately Kept Non-Human Primates. Primates must have company of their own kind, humans and traditional companion animals like dogs and cats are no substitute. Most primates are sold individually on the internet, are advertised as “easy to look after” and are intended to be kept individually. I believe that internet trade in primates, both commercial and private should be banned. A seller has a duty of care to the primate they are selling (according to the Animal Welfare Act 2006) and a prospective owner should be given care information specific to that primate, including medical history. Internet trade does not support this and any attempt to regulate would be extremely difficult to enforce. I further believe that the practice of keeping primates as pets should be banned, that only specialist keepers should keep a primate for welfare or conservation reasons (e.g. in a sanctuary). A primate’s needs cannot be met in a domestic situation. Zoo and laboratory housed primates have extensive legislation protecting their welfare. The only reason why zoo and laboratory legislation is effective is that the location of the primates is known to the inspectorate. This cannot be achieved regarding pet keeping, the DWA demonstrates this clearly. It would be a huge benefit if the Government would define pet ownership (keeping as a companion in a domestic situation) and specialist keeping (keeping by academically trained and technically experienced individuals in specialist facilities) so that the two can be differentiated. The keeping of primates as pets should be banned, while specialist keepers should be subject to rigorous licensing conditions.  The burden of licensing should not fall to the local authority which is under-resourced and unable to effectively enforce existing animal related legislation, but should be centrally administered by the Government. The cost of licensing should be funded by specialist keepers. The standard of licensing conditions should equal those of the Zoo Licensing Act 1981.  The prohibition of pet primate keeping, internet trade in primates and the licensing of specialist keeping should be achieved using secondary legislation created under the Animal Welfare Act 2006. I believe the Act is sufficiently broad and that prohibition of internet trade and pet primate keeping is proportionate given the level of suffering primates can experience when their needs are not met, while licensing of specialist keeping permits rescue and rehoming as a ban in pet keeping is phased in and would provide life-long sanctuary to ex-pet primates.   January 2014&#xa0;