&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Written Evidence Submitted ]]]

[[[by ]]]

[[[PeacePlayers International – Middle East]]]I wish to submit this submission of evidence on behalf of PeacePlayers International – Middle East, an organization that uses basketball as a medium for bridging divides between Palestinian and Israeli youth. 

[[[1. ]]]

[[[Executive Summary]]]

[[[2. Organizational Background]]]Established in 2001, PeacePlayers International (PPI) is non-profit organization that uses the game of basketball to unite, educate and inspire young people in divided communities, based on the premise that children who play together can learn to live together. Since its launch in 2001, PeacePlayers International has worked with over 60,000 children and trained more than 600 youth leaders in Israel, Northern Ireland, South Africa, and Cyprus. In all of its bases, PPI uses the language and unique dynamic of basketball to break down seemingly insurmountable barriers. In 2005, PeacePlayers International – Middle East (PPI – ME) initiated multi-faceted, year-round programs for Palestinian and Israeli youth. PPI’s core program, the PeacePlayers Basketball Clubs (PPBC), seeks to promote peaceful coexistence by bringing Palestinian and Israeli youth together through joint peacebuilding and athletic activities. PPI’s innovative peacebuilding curriculum, designed and implemented in partnership with the global consultancy the Arbinger Institute, integrates tested conflict transformation techniques into basketball activities. The curriculum provides our participants with an opportunity to build friendships with children from the “other” side, develop practical skills to deal with conflict in their everyday lives and grow into ambassadors for peace in their communities. By offering structured, equitable athletic and educational programming, PPI – ME challenges the status quo of hatred and fear that grip Palestinian and Israeli societies, making cross-community cooperation logical and normal. Past external and internal evaluations, conducted by Bar Ilan University (Israel), have consistently demonstrated significant attitude change among youth following participation in the program (see the Evaluation section for more details on program evaluation and impact). In November, 2012, PPI – ME launched a three-year randomized control study in conjunction conducted in cooperation with New York University. PPI – ME successfully implemented the first year pilot of the study and is current running year two of the study. Accomplishments include:&#xa0;

[[[3. Problem Analysis]]]The Palestinian-Israeli stalemate of recent years is not sustainable. The population growth rate of Israeli settlers in the West Bank is 2.5 the growth rate of the citizen population within Israel, hampering the possibility of implementation of the two-state solution. Moreover, controversial legislation on the Israeli side has been accompanied with an increase in racist sentiments and actions aimed at Palestinians. On the Palestinian side, sanctions imposed against "normalization" activities involving Israelis hamper the growth of pro-peace initiatives. To date, U.S.-led peace talks have yielded little fruit, and populations on both sides are skeptical regarding the possibilities for peace. This is supported by the fact that recent approaches to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict emphasize that a negotiated solution will require a transformation of the attitudes of both communities in the direction of reconciliation, mutual trust, and cooperation: a "bottom-up" approach, in which a change in public opinion precipitates a shift in policy. Israeli and Palestinian societies are separated by walls physical and social; language, religion and culture have created a “tight, almost impermeable ethnic boundary” between the two communities. Individuals are left to learn about the “other” primarily through the media, myths, and stereotypes, allowing prejudice and fear to thrive. These misconceptions serve to justify further segregation, in turn begetting only more ignorance. Equitable, structured contact in pursuit of shared goals has been shown to powerfully reduce such prejudices, and team sports – such as basketball, PeacePlayers International – Middle East program’s primary tool for integration – serve as an ideal tool to facilitate such encounters, aided by clear, impartial rules and easily identifiable team goals.Equitable, structured contact in pursuit of shared goals has been shown to powerfully reduce such prejudices, and team sports – such as basketball, PPI – ME's primary tool for integration – serve as an ideal tool to facilitate such encounters, aided by clear, impartial rules and easily identifiable team goals. Palestinian and Israeli children may attend different schools, live in segregated towns and neighborhoods and speak different languages, but they all play sports according to the same rules. Sport also enjoys almost universal appeal, attracting individuals independently of their politics, socioeconomic status and ethnicity. By bringing the two sides together for regular integrated practices and games, PPI – ME provides a neutral forum for the establishment of deep personal bonds and lasting friendships. This sustained contact successfully challenges youths' negative preconceptions of the “other,” allowing them to explore different cultures in a positive setting.A critique of many past coexistence programs has been that they offered either intensive, but short-term interventions, or programming that was long-term in nature but offered limited, irregular contact. Moreover, few facilitators of such programs had received any formal training in conflict resolution, and thus were deemed ineffectual as facilitators. In addition, one study has claimed that although stereotypes develop during early childhood, most inter-group cooperation activities did not engage participants in this age group. From these observations, we may conclude that necessary conditions for effective coexistence activities would include regular, long-term programming, would be led by trained conflict resolution facilitators and would engage participants starting at a very young age. PPI – ME has adopted each of these conditions in developing its programming, and in 2012, augmented the effectiveness of programming by adding two local curriculum facilitators who have received intensive training to be certified to deliver Arbinger conflict resolution workshops to a variety of audiences.&#xa0;

[[[4. Activities]]]PPI – ME runs frequent, year-round programming, which includes the following:

[[[PeacePlayers Basketball Clubs]]] – A network of youth basketball clubs in which Palestinians and Israelis children come together for integrated practices led the guidance of a diverse group of coaches.

[[[Jerusalem All-Stars: ]]]Three fully integrated PPI – ME teams compete in the Israel Basketball Association’s elite youth league, in cooperation with top women's basketball club ASA Jerusalem. Teams are comprised of Israeli and Palestinian girls from East and West Jerusalem, marking the first time a joint Palestinian-Israeli team from Jerusalem has joined the league.

[[[Peace Education Retreats: ]]]Palestinian and Israeli participants embark on one three-day retreat per year, at which they take part in intensive peace education workshops.

[[[Leadership Development Program: ]]]Exceptional teen leaders engage in weekly practices, volunteer as assistant coaches with younger participants, lead social action projects and embark on an annual three-day Leadership Development Retreat.

[[[Coaches for Conflict Resolution:]]]

[[[ ]]]PPI – ME's newest program, launched in 2013, Coaches for Conflict Resolution is a two-year bilingual (Arabic and Hebrew) training program, designed and implemented by PPI – ME in cooperation with Zinman College at the Wingate Institute and the Arbinger Institute. The course features professional coaching certification training (legally required for coaching in Israel and East Jerusalem); quarterly intensive conflict resolution workshops (including an annual weekend retreat); foreign language instruction (Arabic for Israelis, Hebrew for Palestinians) to enhance symmetry, instill an appreciation for the "other's" culture, and to improve participants' ability to communicate with one another;  and a year-long hands-on supervised practicum, in which coaches-in-training help facilitate joint activities for PPBC participants.&#xa0;

[[[5. Evaluations]]]Independent evaluators conduct impact evaluations on PPI – ME's programs on an annual basis. From 2005 – 2011, evaluations were conducted by a group of researchers from Bar-Ilan University. Data demonstrated the both Palestinian and Israeli participants had fewer stereotypes and ethnocentric attitudes and were more willing to engage in social contact with the "other" side following participation in the program. These positive attitudes became stronger with long-term participation over the course of four years. In the 2012-2013 program year, PPI – ME lanched a long-term randomized control trial (RCT) conducted by two professional evaluators, in cooperation with New York University. The study will take place over three years, and will employ sophisticated behavioral and attitudinal measures to study the effects of PPI’s programs on adolescents living in conflict, examining intergroup and intra-group perceptions, political identity formation, and communities’ capacities for conflict management. In 2013, the pilot year of the study was completed successfully, and conclusions from the pilot study were used to refine the methodology. The second year of the study has recently been launched. Funding has been achieved for an additional two years of research, and the organization and the university are currently seeking funding in order to extend the study further. Little quantitative research exists in the field of grassroots peace-building interventions, and the results of the study will represent a much needed addition to the understanding of conflict resolution.&#xa0;

[[[6. Conclusion]]]We thank the House of Commons for this opportunity to present evidence regarding the unique circumstances of the Israeli Palestinian conflict, and for the need for increased civil society actions that will build trust among individuals on both sides. Popular support for a formal peace agreement will give leaders the power to make what seems now to be a distant, unlikely possibility into a viable endeavor.&#xa0;Regards,Karen DoubiletManaging Director, PeacePlayers International – Middle East&#xa0;&#xa0; Muzafer Sherif, Superordinate Goals in the Reduction of Intergroup Conflict 63 American Journal of Sociology 349, 355 (1958). http://www.btselem.org/settlements/statistics               Maoz, Ifat. "An Experiment in Peace: Reconciliation-Aimed Workshops of Jewish-Israeli and Palestinian Youth." Journal of Peace Research 37, no. 6 (2000): 721-736. Romann &amp; Weingrod. 1993. Living Together Separately: Palestinians and Israelis in Contemporary Jerusalem by International Journal of Middle East Studies, Vol. 25, No. 1 (Feb., 1993), pp. 148-14 Pettigrew, Thomas and Linda R. Tropp. “A Meta-Analytic Test of Intergroup Contact Theory.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2006. Vol. 90. No. 5. Pgs. 751-763 Pettigrew, Thomas and Linda R. Tropp. “A Meta-Analytic Test of Intergroup Contact Theory.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2006. Vol. 90. No. 5. Pgs. 751-763 P. Lemish, "Cultural conflict and the curriculum," paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Research Association, San Francisco, 1989. Cornell, Jennifer C. “Prejudice Reduction Through Intergroup Contact in Northern Ireland: A Social-Psychological Critique.” Conflict Quarterly, Winter 1994. P. Lemish, "Cultural conflict and the curriculum," paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Research Association, San Francisco, 1989.&#xa0;