&#xa0;Written evidence from Simon Parker (CYS0115)&#xa0;The difficulty is in the big cities is probably the mix of how we travel is wrong. We need to encourage people to cycle and therefore we need to make the roads safe, and to do that you have to plan, not just one year, it's year on year, it's decade on decade, and other cities manage to do it, and we could do it too. It's very difficult to change the road layout for cyclists in a matter of months; it does take a long time planning, and it can be done, and it's done effectively across Europe.So that's the first practical step you would take, just to try to encourage people to get out of their cars and onto bicycles?It only needs people on the margin: the people who are more likely to do it, to encourage them. Of course there are people who won't do it whatever, but if enough people do it, it does make a change. We're talking about things on the margin. (Interview with Andrew Davis, Director of the Environmental Travel Association, on BBC Radio Five Live)&#xa0;In a very long and detailed publication entitled&#xa0;Cycle Network and Route Planning Guide, the following point was made: “Strategic cycling plans should consider whether or not it is practical to design facilities so that they are suitable for cyclists of basic competence.”&#xa0;Echoing Andrew Davis’ point about it only needing people on the margin to begin with, Cycling: the way ahead for towns and cities speaks of “encouraging the mass of non-cyclists who are most likely to take up cycling again".  &#xa0;Cycling: the way ahead is the only publication out of Europe to answer the question: How to start? This is what it says about the function of facilities, in the chapter entitled ‘Safety: a responsibility’:&#xa0;“According to his or her physical aptitudes, balance, agility, rapidity of reflexes and clarity of perception, the adult cyclist will instinctively choose his or her routes […]. Cyclists must therefore be enabled to circulate everywhere, on both secondary roads and major routes.&#xa0;“Children are a different category. Less capable than adults of choosing their itinerary according to their skills, they need guidance and various facilities all along their route. Routes leading to schools merit particular attention, therefore (and parents and schoolchildren are, moreover, very good at advising on possible improvements).&#xa0;“In the town of Courtrai (Belgium), the town council is paying special attention to these routes and has not hesitated to take special measures during peak traffic times regarding school routes (some streets are closed to traffic in one direction, policemen are on duty at hazardous crossroads where there are no special facilities provided). As a result, 60% of the journeys made by schoolchildren are by bicycle.”&#xa0;You can probably tell from the syntax that this work is written by non-native English-speakers. For example, in big, bold lettering, on page 2 of the chapter about how to start, it says: “The level of minimum functioning is a prudent course to follow.” Probably we would talk about the prudence of introducing the network to a minimum level of functioning, but already I am allowing myself to be side-tracked. &#xa0;The point about safe routes to school is that they can be dealt with separately, as part of local cycling plans. In London, for example, there are over 2,200 schools. If you sought to provide links to all of these schools at a strategic level, this would end up being an incredibly ambitious undertaking. &#xa0;Cycling: the way ahead doesn’t mention the disabled at all, and talks about the elderly only in passing, but I want now to introduce to you some evidence from Portland, Oregon.&#xa0;The Cycling Coordinator there, a chap called Roger Geller, has written a famous paper entitled Four types of cyclist. The four types are:&#xa0;&#xa0;The strong and fearless make up about 1% of the population, and will cycle regardless of the conditions. (Or rather, they are more concerned about potholes than heavy traffic.)&#xa0;The enthused and confident make up about 8-10% of the population, and they include people like myself.&#xa0;The interested but concerned make up about 60% of the population. In high cycling countries, the authorities have found that it has paid off to ensure that this group is properly provided for. Thus we see the development of protected cycleways and the like. Cities like Cambridge, certainly, and York, probably, are now in a position where they can seriously consider the provision of quality infrastructure at a strategic level, but cities like London and Manchester don’t even have the basics in place just yet.&#xa0;The exemplar schemes which are proposed for London and Manchester are all to the good, of course, but only up to a point. To begin with, Lynn Sloman has suggested, the focus of our attention should switch from a few grandiose schemes to thousands of small initiatives. "Even if their impact is not massive,"&#xa0;Cycling: the way ahead&#xa0;explains, "it will be real."&#xa0;Okay, so the basic strategy is as follows: plan, study and then “introduce” a cycle network. Once it is up and running, develop it further “on the basis of priority interventions and a timetable”. This strategy is still running its course in the Netherlands (the Dutch program these things to work in twenty-year cycles, I believe). It is absolutely the tried and tested method, and it is incredibly frustrating that people here consistently find ways to misunderstand it.&#xa0;“Oh, we’ve tried all that!” some of them say, confusing a cycle network which functions at a minimum level as “more of the same”. But actually it’s a means to an end, a stepping-stone. The eastern philosophers talk about going from zero to one as being the hardest step, and in this case, ‘one’ is a comprehensive, city-wide cycle network. Once the network has been made to work, once it is functioning, once it is up and running, going from one to two, from two to three, from three to four, and so on, would be relatively quite easy. By the time you need to go from six to seven, you find that you can skip along. But without a solid foundation, it’s very difficult to build upwards in any sort of meaningful way. &#xa0;The case is, there isn’t a single town or city in this country which has a functioning cycle network, so how can people say this approach has been tried before?&#xa0;Just a few words about a network introduced to the point where it functions. It is of paramount importance that cyclists are visible to motor traffic. This does not mean hi-viz; rather it means that cyclists have to be positioned in the correct place relative to everyone else. For example, research from Denmark suggests that the 'bike box' should be at least five metres deep (so that lorry drivers have a direct view of any cyclists who may be waiting ahead of them).&#xa0;Stressing that I am talking here about short-term solutions, another measure—which is linked to a different aspect of good cycle provision—is to make alternative cycle routes more numerous, more comfortable, easier to follow, and more convenient (by removing annoyances for cyclists, for example). &#xa0;This said, as reported in the Cycle Network and Route Planning Guide: “Alternative routes merely supplement the main road routes, and rarely eliminate the need for cycle provision on the latter”; and also: “Indirect cycle routes may lead cyclists to choose more direct routes with greater risk”.&#xa0;Finally, there is no debate between myself and other cycle advocates about where we would like to end up. No, the debate is about where to begin. I have asked them maybe a thousand million, billion squillion times why they are not campaigning for the installation of high quality infrastructure to be undertaken within the framework provided by a functioning cycle network. I never do get an answer. &#xa0;We often hear in this country about how dangerous cycling is, but rather than focus on the removal of a negative, why don’t we try to build on a positive? For the Enthused and Confident cyclists, the problem is not so much safety, as access. The bicycle is the fastest, most convenient form of transport in the built-up area. If we opened up our one-way streets and parks to cycling, people would respond very positively.&#xa0;I would like to close with a quote from Steffen Rasmussen from the City of Copenhagen. He came to give evidence to the GLA eighteen months ago, and the very first thing he said—the very first thing—was as follows: “The key word is an holistic approach and then a separation of functions.”&#xa0;Key Points:&#xa0;Network firstLong-term plan – sustained investmentBuild on the positives Treat routes to school separatelyConsider, at a strategic level, is it practical to design facilities for cyclists of basic competence at this stage?&#xa0;&#xa0;Also, I have abridged three important chapters from Cycling: the way ahead:&#xa0;Safety: a responsibility&#xa0;(chapter 4),&#xa0;Daring to redistribute space and means&#xa0;(chapter 5), and&#xa0;What needs to be known&#xa0;(chapter 6).&#xa0;Finally, forgive the preamble, but I have also transcribed much of the Transport Select Committee’s Investigation into cycle safety.&#xa0;January 2014&#xa0;