&#xa0;

[[[Written Evidence]]]

[[[ from the Department ]]]

[[[for]]]

[[[ Environment, Food and Rural Affairs]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;1.1&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Defra welcomes the opportunity to submit evidence to Efra on the keeping of primates as pets.&#xa0;1.2              Primates are among the most intelligent animals; they are socially complex, long lived and require specialist keeping. &#xa0;1.3              It is understandable, therefore, that people should be concerned when they hear of primates being kept in inappropriate conditions that contravene the Animal Welfare Act 2006.&#xa0;1.4              Defra’s responsibility is to ensure that animals are provided with the appropriate protection and that enforcers have the necessary powers to take action in order to investigate allegations of cruelty or poor welfare.  Defra also sees its role as reminding owners and potential owners of their responsibility to provide for the welfare needs of their animals, as required under the Animal Welfare Act 2006. &#xa0;1.5              Defra would like to make it clear that primates should not be kept as pets in the conventional meaning of the word “pet”.  If keeping a primate as a pet means keeping it in the domestic setting, whether in a cage or running free, then this would be likely to be in breach of section 9 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 (the need to provide an animal with its welfare needs).  However, keeping primates in a suitable social group setting in suitably constructed accommodation and ensuring that all of the welfare needs of the animals are met should comply with the Animal Welfare Act requirements - as long as all other related regulations are being met.&#xa0;2.1              Periodically the Government receives correspondence from interested stakeholders or individual members of the public, usually in response to campaigns from stakeholders, expressing their concern about the conditions in which some primates are being kept by individual owners.  Anecdotal evidence of solitary primates being kept in small cages in a domestic setting and being fed inappropriate diets are central to most of the concerns.  Other concerns relate to the ease with which primates are advertised for sale on the internet.  Many adverts use terminology such as “good with children”, “diaper trained” and “will provide good company”.  Such claims are disturbing because we do not consider that primates should be kept in a domestic setting.&#xa0;2.2              There are also allegations that many primates are being kept in breach of other legislation (e.g. the Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) as well as the Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976 - see “Legislative framework”.  Under the 1976 Act, anyone wishing to keep a listed animal must obtain a valid licence from their local authority.  There are claims that listed animals are being kept without an appropriate licence.&#xa0;2.3              Other allegations claim that primates are taken from their natural habitat in the wild and transported to developed countries such as the UK and the US to be kept as pets.  Such action is likely to be in breach of laws in other countries as well as CITES and regulations on the welfare of animals in transport. However, there is little evidence to show that wild-caught primates are being transported to this country for the pet trade.  It is more likely that UK residents will obtain a captive bred primate than one that is wild caught and then transported to this country.&#xa0;Animal Welfare Act 20063.1              For years, the Protection of Animals Act 1911 was the principal piece of legislation that protected animals from acts of cruelty.  Under this law, it was an offence to cause any unnecessary suffering to an animal.  This stood the test of time and was used by agencies, such as the RSPCA to prosecute around 800-1,000 people for animal cruelty each year.&#xa0;3.2              However, in 2007 the Animal Welfare Act 2006 (the “2006 Act”) came into force.  This largely replaced the 1911 Act and as well as retaining the “causing unnecessary suffering offence”, also introduced the “welfare offence” under which an owner or keeper could be prosecuted for failing to provide for the welfare needs of an animal.  The welfare offence was based on a similar offence that related to farm animals.  The new offence meant that for the first time owners of non-farm animals could be prosecuted for failing to look after their animals properly, even if no suffering had actually occurred.  This has the benefit of not having to wait for an animal to undergo suffering before action can be taken.  &#xa0;3.3              Under the 2006 Act, the maximum penalty for causing unnecessary suffering to an animal is 6 months imprisonment or a fine of £20,000, or both. The maximum penalty for failing to provide for the welfare needs of an animal is 6 months imprisonment or a fine of £5,000, or both.&#xa0;3.4              The welfare of primates is therefore protected under the 2006 Act. &#xa0;Primate Code of Practice3.5              In addition, under the 2006 Act there are powers for the Secretary of State to make statutory codes of practice for the welfare of animals or animal related activities.  In 2010, Defra introduced the Code of Practice for the Welfare of Privately Kept Non-human Primates.  The code was made in response to concerns about primates expressed during the passage of the Animal Welfare Bill through Parliament.  &#xa0;3.6              Whilst it is not a specific offence to breach the Code, if proceedings are brought under the Act, the Court can take into account the extent to which someone has complied, or failed to comply, with the Code in deciding whether they have committed an offence.&#xa0;3.7              This Code of Practice is a guide to the steps a private keeper of primates must take to meet the needs of an animal as required by Section 9 of the 2006 Act.  It also provides local authority or RSPCA inspectors, who may be investigating an allegation of a primate being kept in poor welfare conditions, with guidance on how the primate should be being kept. It does not apply to zoos or research establishments (where other guidance is available). &#xa0;3.8              The Code of Practice is due to be reviewed in 2015 (five years after it was made).  We will be inviting key stakeholders and experts to take part in the review.&#xa0;Pet Animals Act 19513.9              The 1951 Act requires anyone who is in the business of selling animals as pets to obtain a valid licence from their local authority.  The local authority has powers to inspect premises and decide whether to issue a licence based on whether the animals will be held in appropriate conditions.  The local authority can issue a licence with conditions such as limiting the species of animals the pet shop may sell.  The local authority has powers to investigate allegations of cruelty or poor welfare in a pet shop.  The local authority also has powers to charge a fee to an applicant to cover the cost of administering the licensing scheme. &#xa0;3.10              Anyone who is in the business of selling animals as pets and does not hold a valid licence is committing an offence.  The maximum penalty for such an offence is 3 months imprisonment and/or a fine of £500.  &#xa0;Dangerous Wild Animals Act 19763.11              Certain species of primate deemed sufficiently dangerous are contained in a Schedule to the Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976 (the “1976 Act”) and are subject to a licensing regime administered and enforced by local authorities. &#xa0;3.12              The precise primate species listed in the Schedule to the 1976 Act and thereby requiring a licence to keep them are:&#xa0;New-world monkeys (including: capuchin, howler, saki, uacari, spider and woolly monkeys - night monkeys (also known as owl monkeys) titi monkeys and squirrel monkeys are excepted); Old-world monkeys (including: baboons, the drill, colobus monkeys, the gelada, guenons, langurs, leaf monkeys, macaques, the mandrill, mangabeys, the patas and proboscis monkeys and the talapoin); Anthropoid apes (chimpanzees, gorillas, bonobos, and orang-utans);Gibbons and Siamangs;Leaping lemurs (including: the indri, and sifakas - the woolly lemur is excepted); Large lemurs (bamboo or gentle lemurs are excepted).&#xa0;3.13              The schedule of listed species was last amended in 2007. The amendments were made in order to reflect species better that are considered as genuinely dangerous to people – there were criticisms that the previous list was not consistent in this respect.&#xa0;&#xa0;3.14              Some stakeholders would like to see certain species of primates re-instated on the schedule in order to provide more protection for primates.&#xa0; However, it is important to remember that the 1976 Act is principally about protecting people from animals rather than providing additional welfare protection to animals.&#xa0; Therefore the schedule should reflect animals that are considered a genuine threat to the public.&#xa0; Simply to place more species on the schedule as a way of providing an additional regulatory requirement for owners, or potential owners, of primates would potentially go beyond the scope and purpose of the 1976 Act and legal advice has confirmed that, if species were listed for reasons other than their dangerousness, then there would be a high risk of legal challenge being successful.&#xa0;3.15              There is no central depository, held either by Defra or DCLG, for information relating to the number of licences issued or which species they cover.  These are kept within each local authority.&#xa0;3.16              The 1976 Act provides some ancillary welfare provisions as a local authority cannot grant a licence unless it is satisfied that the specimens “kept…. under the authority of the licence”: “be held in accommodation which secures that the animal will not escape, which is suitable as regards construction, size, temperature, lighting, ventilation, drainage and cleanliness and which is suitable for the number of animals proposed to be held in the accommodation, and be supplied with adequate and suitable food, drink and bedding material and be visited at suitable intervals.”&#xa0;3.17              The 1976 Act is a regulatory piece of legislation rather than a prohibitive one and does not deny the right for people to keep those animals listed on the Schedule as long as an appropriate licence has been obtained.&#xa0;&#xa0; &#xa0;Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES)3.18              All primates are listed on CITES of which the UK is a signatory.&#xa0;Through CITES, the UK works with 178 other countries to protect endangered species of animals and plants by restricting and monitoring international trade in them.  The objective of CITES is not to prohibit all trade in animals and plants, but to ensure that it is carried out in a sustainable way that ensures the long-term survival of all species.  CITES prohibits the commercial importation of the most endangered Appendix I wild-taken primates in all but exceptional circumstances, such as for breeding or educational purposes which benefit the conservation of the species.&#xa0;&#xa0;Trade in captive-bred specimens is generally considered to be sustainable and so is allowed, subject to certain licensing provisions.  All imports of primates from outside the EU are subject to strict controls.&#xa0;3.19              Records of primates being imported as pets into the UK from outside the EU (no CITES records are kept of intra-EU trade) are rare. They show that in the past 5 years (December 2008 – December 2013) only 4 live primates have been reported as imported for personal purposes into the UK; of these, two were imported by an animal sanctuary.  &#xa0;3.20              Although CITES is not a welfare Convention, the EU Wildlife Trade Regulations that implement CITES in the EU place a condition on imports of all live Annex A and B species (the EU equivalents of Appendices I and II) that the intended accommodation must be adequate to care for the animals properly. This applies to all primates. Such import applications must be accompanied by a detailed description of the intended housing facilities so that the relevant CITES Scientific Authority (the Joint Nature Conservation Committee) can assess their adequacy as part of the application.&#xa0;4.1              During 2013, Defra officials asked a representative of private keepers to work with the Pet Advertising Advisory Group (PAAG - a group of animal welfare, keeping and veterinary organisations) to draw up guidance and pop-ups for internet advertisers (similar to work they have done with other pets).&#xa0;4.2              PAAG have now published advice to potential owners of primates which is available on their website.  Once PAAG know who their affiliated websites will be (those who agree to adopt their minimum standards) those sites will place the pop-ups on their classified pages.   &#xa0;4.3              We have been alerted by stakeholders that some advertisements for primates may be bogus and an attempt to extract money from unwitting customers in exchange for an animal that doesn’t exist.  The advertisements are allegedly selling a primate in this country but the use of American-English terminology, such as “diaper-trained” should arouse suspicion as “diaper” is not in common use in this country.&#xa0;5.1              It is not clear how many primates are kept privately in this country – the estimates range from 2,500 to 7,500. These are rough estimates based around numbers of 1976 Act licences issued in relation to primates and sales of primates. &#xa0;5.2              The number of pet primates rescued by Monkey World (one of two primate sanctuaries in England) has, according to their records, increased in the last two years from an average of 0.4 per year from 1989 to 2011, to 15 in 2012 and 11 in 2013.  Whilst this shows a steep increase it is low in absolute terms and would be too early to say whether such figures signal a steady rise in primate ownership or a steady rise in people alerting the authorities about welfare concerns of primates.  We would also need more evidence on which to base any estimates about the numbers of privately held primates.&#xa0;6.1              Some people have called for additional regulations to help secure the welfare of primates.&#xa0;6.2              Animals in zoos are protected not only by the Animal Welfare Act 2006 but also by the Zoo Licensing Act 1981.  The 1981 Act defines a zoo as an establishment where wild animals (those not normally domesticated in the UK) are kept for exhibition to the public for seven days or more a year.   The Act requires all zoos to have a licence, although exemptions from some or all of the provisions of the Act can be allowed for small zoos in specific circumstances.  Zoos are subject to inspection and licensing by their local authority.  &#xa0;6.3              There have been calls for individual primate owners to be subject to the same requirements as zoos.  Under the 1981 Act, the Secretary of State has published Standards of Modern Zoo Practice with which all zoos are expected to comply if they wish to be granted and subsequently retain a zoo licence.   However, the standards go further than requiring minimum welfare standards for the animals.  They also set out how zoos should meet the conservation and education requirements of the Act (arising from the EC Zoos Directive), and also how public safety should be secured.  Clearly for individual owners these requirements will not be required – although for primates listed in the Schedule to the Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976 there is a need to prevent injury to people by the animals.  We would therefore not expect to apply the Secretary of State’s Standards of Modern Zoo Practice to individual owners.  However, for purposes of animal welfare, we consider that the standards set out in the Primate Code of Practice provide primates owned by individuals with the same level of protection as those kept in zoos.  In both cases the Animal Welfare Act 2006 would apply in the event of any cases of cruelty or poor welfare.  &#xa0;&#xa0;7.1              Whilst we agree that people should not be keeping primates in inappropriate conditions the available evidence does not suggest that this is a major problem.  &#xa0;7.2              We do not consider that it would be appropriate to seek to ban the keeping of primates as pets because it is already illegal to keep primates in “pet like conditions”, i.e. to keep primates in inappropriate conditions is an offence under the Animal Welfare Act 2006.  To seek a specific ban on top of the existing law would be difficult to achieve because there would have to be a definition of “pet” or something that differentiates from keeping them in suitable conditions.  Even if a definition could be found it is difficult to see what this would achieve that is not currently available under the existing law.&#xa0;7.3              To introduce a wider ban on the trade in primates or on all private keeping of primates would mean that knowledgeable people who keep them in appropriate conditions would be unable to continue to do so.  This would penalise law abiding, responsible owners because of the actions of irresponsible owners.  It would be disproportionate and, given the number of primates imported as pets (four in last five years), without any real foundation.&#xa0;7.4              The Government considers that the existing legislation on the welfare of kept animals and the regulation of the pet trade provide enforcers with appropriate powers to take action in cases where a primate’s welfare is causing a concern.&#xa0;7.5              We also consider that PAAG’s work will help to alert prospective owners of primates to the welfare needs of primates.  &#xa0;7.6              The forthcoming review of the Primate code of practice will also help to assess whether further action needs to be taken.&#xa0;January 2014&#xa0; When looking at advertisements on a relevant website a “window” will automatically open on the viewer’s computer screen providing key information about primates.