Written evidence from the Association of Convenience Stores [TOB06]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Introduction]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]1.              ACS welcomes the opportunity to respond to this important inquiry into tobacco smuggling. ACS is a trade association, which represents over 33,500 stores across the UK, including Spar UK, Nisa Retail, Costcutter and thousands of independent stores. Tobacco represents an important category for the convenience market, and ACS advocates the responsible sale of tobacco products through vigorous age verification policies within our members’ stores.2.              Illicit sales of tobacco products create significant burdens to both convenience store retailers and the Government .The availability of cheap, illicit tobacco within communities harms legitimate retailers who sell products legally and in a responsible manner through implementing age restriction policies within their stores. Businesses not only lose direct sales of tobacco to illicit traders, but also sales of other products by customers who stop coming into their shop. For this reason, ACS is eager to play a part in helping the Government towards its objectives in reducing the prevalence of the illicit tobacco trade, particularly in tackling value (small-scale inland activity) crime. 3.               It is also important to note the unintended consequences that the introduction of additional regulation of tobacco products, such as the tobacco display ban, or an increase in tobacco duty, might have on the growing prevalence of the illicit tobacco trade. For instance, the most price-sensitive consumers living in lower-income areas might be deterred from purchasing legal tobacco products from legitimate retailers if they feel out-priced by increased prices, or a customer could experience longer queues and transaction times when the tobacco display ban is introduced in small stores in 2015, which could also discourage them from purchasing tobacco from legitimate sources. 4.               As operational targets for tobacco seizure have been missed in 2012-13, priority should instead be given to growing activity and regulation against the illicit trade to avoid undermining the progress already made by the Government and legitimate retailers to lower the number of smokers and to ensure that underage children cannot access these products. Illicit traders target those living in lower-income areas, particularly children, who are not only attracted by the lower price of illicit products, but also by the ease of access to them, owing to a lack of age restriction enforced by this market.   5.              ACS welcomed the National Audit Office’s recent report into HMRC’s progress in implementing its tobacco smuggling strategy, which highlighted HMRC and UK Border Force’s failings in meeting their operational targets. In reaction to this report, ACS has called on the Government to make more resources available to police, Trading Standards and health officials working in local authorities to be able to identify and prosecute tobacco smugglers. When these targets are missed, tens and thousands of legitimate retailers will suffer from being undercut by unregulated smugglers. 6.              ACS also welcomed the Public Accounts Committee’s evidence sessions into tobacco smuggling, which again indicated that further work is needed in tackling inland volume (lower level) crime.  7.              Our submission to this inquiry will focus on the following terms of reference: Why Border Force failed to meet its operational targets for tobacco seizure in 2012–13Whether the current sanctions and penalties for tobacco smuggling are appropriate8.               ACS would be willing to provide oral evidence to the Committee’s inquiry.

[[[Declaration of Links to the Tobacco Industry]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]9.               ACS is open and transparent about the commercial relationship between our organisation and tobacco manufacturers. As part of our efforts to ensure this, ACS has notified the Department of Health detailing the nature of our commercial relationship. A copy of our letter is attached in Annex A and is available on our website. &#xa0;10.              As stated in the attached letter, tobacco companies and other tobacco manufacturers have no influence over ACS policy positions. These are decided by members through the ACS Management Board and policy committees upon which no tobacco companies are represented.

[[[Why Border Force failed to meet its operational targets for tobacco seizure in 2012–13]]]11.               Although HMRC has made significant progress in tackling the illicit trade at UK borders, the lack of focus on the growth of volume crime on the ground in communities has meant that inland illicit activity has been able to thrive in our most vulnerable communities, and has contributed to the failure of HMRC to reach its operational targets in 2012-13.  12.               This is evident from HMRC’s own statistics on prosecutions. The proportion of prosecutions for inland seizures compared with those on the border and overseas is extremely low, and targets have also been missed in this area.  For instance, only 5% of cigarettes seized in 2010-2011 and 14% of Hand Rolling Tobacco were seized inland.13.              Government-led responsibility for tackling smuggling lies with HMRC; however local agencies have the network and the people to identify illegal tobacco sales in the community, particularly in the case of low-level volume crime. There are currently limited links between these agencies, and there is a pressing need for a more co-ordinated approach between local and national enforcement. Clear responsibilities should be outlined for Trading Standards and local police in this area; they should not serve as merely a supporting partner of HMRC. 14.              In addition to a defined remit of enforcement to local bodies, funds need to be made available to dedicate sufficient resource on the ground. ACS believes that a 3 year budget allocation should be given to Trading Standards and the police specifically for enforcement activity against the illegal sale and supply of illicit tobacco in communities.15.              One example of where such partnership working has yielded success is the ‘North of England Tackling Illicit Tobacco for Better Health Programme’, which combined greater partnerships between health and enforcement officers and HMRC with consumer campaigns to achieve a greater awareness and ability to tackle the prevalent illicit trade within the region. In its evaluation of the programme, the UK Centre for Tobacco Control Studies said that it had led to a reduction of demand for illicit tobacco and that it had led to a “greater coordination of activities” to reduce the supply of illicit tobacco in the region. 16.               Although the ‘North of England Tackling Illicit Tobacco for Better Health Programme’ and other existing partnerships have shown promising results, it is disappointing that such programmes have not yet reached other parts of the country because of funding constraints. &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;

[[[Whether the current sanctions and penalties for tobacco smuggling are appropriate]]]17.              ACS believes that current sanctions against tobacco smugglers, particularly those who operate on the ground within communities, are not strong enough and do not target the correct people. Current activities, such as the use of UK Duty ‘fiscal mark’ detector and banning orders do not target illicit traders who trade in locations such as vans and tab houses, but instead impose further regulatory burdens on legitimate retailers.18.               In addition to additional resources for Trading Standards and local police to be able to bring action against illicit tobacco traders, new and harsher penalties to deter these sellers should also be introduced. ACS believes that the current structure of sanctions is counter-productive and needs to be tackled. Current sanctions are also too complicated and time-consuming for HMRC to pursue. &#xa0;&#xa0;19.              A suite of new and easy to administer penalties targeted at sellers of smuggled tobacco products should be introduced, including:20.              Although prosecutions for volume crime have been gradually increasing, HMRC has not set targets for the number of prosecutions for tobacco fraud in cases of volume crime in tobacco smuggling; there are targets for volume crime across all regimes, but this is not specific to the sale of tobacco. A clear target for the number of volume crimes for tobacco smuggling should be set in order for HMRC to be able to further increase the number of prosecutions for volume tobacco crimes and to track progress. The National Audit Office’s report also highlights that the application of civil penalties against volume crime offenders was delayed because of recruitment delays and legal considerations, which again hampers the progress that can be made to tackle illicit traders who operate at the heart of our communities.    &#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;Mair Roberts27 August 2013&#xa0; HMRC Tackling Tobacco Smuggling Tackling Illicit Tobacco for Better Health: Final Evaluation Report Progress in Tobacco Smuggling, pp.6 Progress in Tobacco Smuggling Progress in Tackling Tobacco Smuggling, pp.26