Written evidence from the Asian Media and Marketing Group [TOB16]&#xa0;&#xa0;1. Asian Trader represents a readership of over 200,000 and we regularly speak out on behalf of our readers to voice their concerns, not just through Asian Trader but also, on their behalf to Members of Parliament. This readership includes over 47,000 convenience stores and newsagents nationwide, which make a huge contribution to the UK economy, and not just financially - they are often the heartbeat of their community.2. The Asian community owns over 75% of all convenience stores/newsagents nationwide. As such convenience retailing, and the struggles independent store owners face, is a key concern of ours andone we regularly write about. Only to frequently do we cover the impact of the illicit tobacco trade on our honest retailers and their local communities.3. In our experience, counterfeiting and smuggling is already having a devastating effect on small retailers. In addition to the illicit trade costing the taxpayer almost £2bn according to the recent National Audit Office report - and this is conservative as these are HMRC figures based on 2011 data - the average convenience retailer loses more than £40,000 every year through illegal tobacco sales. Illicit traders - often part of criminal gangs - continue to lurk in street corners across the UK with noregard to who buy their products.4. The inability of HMRC to control the illicit trade in tobacco products gives smugglers and counterfeiters a platform to expand their illegal activities. It is clear from the recent National Audit Office report that not enough is being done by HMRC and Government to tackle the illegal trade in Roll Your Own (RYO) and cigarette smuggling. According to the report, non-duty paid product for RYO and cigarettes represent 38% and 9% of UK sales - our readers have told us this is more like 49% and 14% respectively.5. Furthermore the majority of stores are run by families where ladies are at the till and are being exposed to threats and violence by criminal gangs.6. The Police are unable to respond in time and often will not attend unless blood has been spilled.7. These stores are at the heart of their local community and play an integral part on the High Street.8. Whilst many areas of this inquiry our out of scope for our comment, on behalf of our readers we wanted to thank the Home Affairs Select Committee for launching this inquiry. The Government needs to crackdown on the illicit trade, and introduce more severe penalties for criminals who knowingly sell illegal product to smokers.9. As an organisation we are happy to play our part in assisting with this where we can; and we will continue to work with Asian Trader retailers to encourage them to report any illegal activity in their area to the relevant authorities in order to protect their livelihoods. In our experience, retailers are often best placed to do so, however they suffer from the lack of joined up working between local police and Trading Standards services.10. I felt it may be useful to include some of the recent cuttings from Asian Trader on this topic which highlight just some of the concerns of our retailers - you can find these attached.11. In the interests of transparency, Asian Media and Marketing Group regularly receives funding from tobacco companies both for marketing and campaigning purposes. However, the views expressed represent the legitimate concerns of our contributing retailers and readership. We stand as guarantors of this.12. If I can be of any further assistance please don't hesitate to let me know&#xa0;29 August 2013