&#xa0;Written evidence from Petrol Retailers Association [TOB18]

[[[&#xa0;]]]1. Introduction:1.1 The Petrol Retailers Association (PRA), part of the Retail Motor Industry Federation (RMI), represents 5,500 independent fuel retailers across the UK, many of whom are small rural filling stations. The retail sector makes a key contribution to the British economy, supporting jobs in communities across the United Kingdom. Forecourt retailing is one of the UK’s most regulated industries and tough economic times, alongside wave after wave of new regulation, are making such businesses financially stressed.  Another 175 forecourts have closed across the UK in the last year alone and 6,000 have closed since 1998.&#xa0;1.2 The PRA welcomes any request to give oral evidence to the Home Office Select Committee relating to this submission.&#xa0;2. Declaration of Interests:2.1 The PRA supports openness and transparency and are therefore willing to disclose that we have some tobacco manufacturers/suppliers amongst our wide range of associates and retail members. The views within this response are widely shared by our members and as such the PRA would hope that the Government give this submission equal treatment as with all other legal, legitimate and law abiding participants&#xa0;3. Our Concerns:3.1 Tobacco is a legal product and is a vital part of the independent forecourt shop sales, contributing between 30 to 50% share of overall revenue – 79% of our retailers think that tobacco is directly important to their bottom line. 3.2 The forecourt sector is already hit hard by the illicit trade in terms of both fuel and tobacco. The illicit trade of tobacco undermines the responsible retailer business and is wholly detrimental to those working within the confines of the law.  Not only do retailers suffer financial loss at the hands of illegal traders, the Treasury cannot afford to compromise tax revenues at a time when the economy can ill afford any further costs or losses of revenue. 3.3 The high profits and low risk involved in smuggling and counterfeiting tobacco allows criminals to make considerable returns by undercutting legitimate retail sales with products that have been known to contain asbestos, dead flies and faeces. Therefore, illicit tobacco undermines small retailers such as our members by depriving them of key earnings whilst having a detrimental effect on general footfall as consumers do not enter their shops to buy other groceries. The social cost of the illicit trade is also extensive, with revenue from the sale of illicit tobacco directly funding all manner of criminal activity that could overflow into the local community, where our members’ businesses are located. 3.4 A report from KPMG in April 2013 showed the UK has the fastest growing problem with illicit tobacco in the entire EU – with contraband and counterfeit production increasing by 6.4% in the last year. The same report shows that the illicit trade in the UK is the fourth highest in the EU, behind only Lithuania, Republic of Ireland and Finland. Unregulated products are being manufactured for the sole purpose of being smuggled to the UK where they are sold on the streets, in markets and by gangs at pocket money prices.3.5 In a poll at the end of last year nearly two-thirds of our members stated that illicit tobacco is having an impact on their business with 34% being aware of illicit products being sold in their area and nearly half believing it is easy to buy them. In addition to this 64% of retailers believe the illicit tobacco trade has a detrimental impact on their business. 3.6 Certain initiatives for discouraging smoking proposed in the UK, Europe and around the world may in fact be fuelling the ‘black market’, having the opposite effect than that intended. In the early 1990s this was seen in Canada when attempts at controlling tobacco use resulted in a surge in illicit tobacco that ultimately culminated in a reverse in Government policy and the rescinding of a string of policy proposals. As such we remain concerned about the impact of excessive regulations on the UK’s already significant (and growing) illicit trade problem. For example:&#xa0;4. Conclusion:4.1 In summary the PRA is concerned that proposed government measures, at both a UK and European level, could increase the illicit tobacco trade and accelerate the already worrying trend of independent petrol forecourt closures. Whilst we welcome government plans to stall the proposed implementation of standardised packaging for tobacco in England we are worried that the scheme could adversely impact our members in Northern Ireland and Scotland, who could see both retail sales and general footfall decrease as a result. It is clear that government need to gain better control of the illicit tobacco trade, but the PRA urge them to turn attention to disrupting illegal supply chains and increasing the amount of arrests, prosecutions and convictions as opposed to penalising the tobacco retailer industry as a whole.   &#xa0;Petrol Retailers AssociationAugust 2013&#xa0; Populus (November 2012) Philip Morris International, Poll of UK Petrol Retail Association Members KPMG, (2013), Project Star 2012 Results http://www.pmi.com/eng/media_center/media_kit/documents/project_star_2012_final_report.pdf Populus (November 2012) Philip Morris International, Poll of UK Petrol Retail Association Members