&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Written evidence submitted by]]]

[[[ Dr. Andrew Blick, Lecturer, Institute of Contemporary British History, King’s College London]]]

[[[ (FTF 06)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]1. The Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011 was a major constitutional innovation, and though it had merit it was – as this Committee has already noted - introduced without sufficient opportunity for parliamentary scrutiny or wider public consultation. It is therefore appropriate to substitute this lack of prior consideration with subsequent assessment, of the sort this Committee is carrying out.

[[[&#xa0;]]]2. There will certainly be many important constitutional dimensions to the impact of the Act. This evidence submission is concerned with two in particular: the role of the Civil Service and the context of coalition government. It considers these issues in particular through assessment of the Cabinet Manual and Ministerial Code, and mechanisms that these documents describe.&#xa0;The Civil Service and pre-election talks3. The present rules governing contact between civil servants and opposition parties in advance of a General Election are set out in the present edition of the Cabinet Manual (paragraph 2.21). Though this text appeared in final form after the advent of the first coalition government since 1945, and following the passing of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011, certain changes to the existing rules, taking into account these twin developments, are necessary. They should be announced as soon as possible, and then eventually be included in a revised text of the manual.&#xa0;4. A first set of issues involves the timing of these talks and the means by which they come about. The manual states:&#xa0;At an appropriate time towards the end of any Parliament, as the next general election approaches, the Prime Minister writes to the leaders of the main opposition parties to authorise pre-election contacts with the Civil Service.&#xa0;5. Since we now have a clearer idea of when an election is likely to take place, it is appropriate to fix a precise time at which this authorisation is issued (assuming the Opposition wants to hold talks), replacing the present vagueness (‘an appropriate time’). This amendment of the rules could also create a firm presumption that this process will begin at this allotted time, lessening any discretion available to the Prime Minister that may exist under the present wording.&#xa0;6. Clarification of how precisely this contact is triggered is also required. The manual tells us that ‘The Cabinet Secretary has overall responsibility for co-ordinating this process once a request has been made and authorised by the Prime Minister.’ This statement seems to imply that a request must come from somewhere other than the Prime Minister (presumably the opposition leader or leaders), and that the Prime Minister can then consent to it. Yet the earlier part of the description cited above seems to suggest that the Prime Minister starts the process.&#xa0;7. A reworded account, creating a broad principle that such contacts were automatic and setting out a timeframe for their commencement, could bypass present confusion regarding when, how, and at whose initiative this process begins, as well as adapting arrangements to the era of fixed-term Parliaments. Any timetabling should build into it flexibility to allow for the contingency of an early General Election taking place, as provided for under the terms of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act. Yet it should ensure that, if a Parliament runs for the standard period, the talks begin at a defined point.&#xa0;8. A minor point is that the reference to ‘main opposition parties’ in the Cabinet Manual text cited above is confusing. Presumably at present there is only one ‘main opposition’ party.&#xa0;9. A second group of concerns involve who is doing the talking, and about what. The manual tells us that: ‘The meetings take place on a confidential basis, without ministers being present or receiving a report of discussions’. The reason that the UK Civil Service is able to perform this function is because of its long-established tradition of party-political impartiality. Senior officials are required to serve existing ministers with loyalty while retaining the ability to serve future such office-holders, of whatever party, equally well. A particular value of this principle is that it can provide for stable transitions from one government to another, either following elections or possibly at other points. Continuity, taken to excess, would be a problem from a democratic perspective. But the possibility for smooth changeovers, provided it is accompanied by meaningful shifts of policy direction as appropriate, has attractions, particularly because of its potential contribution to effective administration.&#xa0;10. The pre-election talks described in the manual are possible precisely because of this tradition of impartiality, and they contribute to the continuity that impartiality helps bring about. It is against this background that certain Civil Service reforms the government is implementing require careful consideration. There seems to be an intention to give secretaries of state enhanced discretion in selecting the senior officials closest to them and in senior roles in departments, through such initiatives as the introduction of Extended Ministerial Offices. These changes, which are underway, seem to entail key civil servants having a clearer personal link to the particular politician who influenced their appointment to a given role. This practice raises general questions about the extent to which the Civil Service can continue to be a provider of stability across different governments; and has specific implications for the practice of pre-election talks. Officials who have a close association of this kind with a serving member of a government would not be well placed to take part in such contacts with the opposition, given the delicate nature of such discussions.&#xa0;11. The manual also sets out the purpose and nature of these talks. It explains that they are intended ‘to allow the Opposition’s shadow ministers to ask questions about departmental organisation and to inform civil servants of any organisational changes likely to take place in the event of a change of government.’ The manual goes on to note that ‘Senior civil servants may ask questions about the implications of opposition parties’ policy statements, although they would not normally comment on or give advice about policies.’ These stipulations seem to be appropriate when the Civil Service is dealing with an opposition party, though the use of the word ‘normally’ could be a significant, if imprecise, qualification.&#xa0;12. However, the manual is silent regarding how the Civil Service might engage with a party that holds office in a coalition, and could therefore find itself either in a single party government or a differently composed coalition following a forthcoming General Election. Is it appropriate, for instance, for officials to advise Conservative ministers in the coalition on negotiations with the European Union leading to a referendum on continued membership, should the Conservative Party win the next General Election? Equally, can officials discuss with Liberal Democrat ministers matters that they might seek to make part of a coalition programme were an agreement reached with Labour after the next General Election? Is it, indeed, appropriate to discuss the specifics of a possible renewed Conservative-Liberal Democrat programme with politicians from these parties (presumably presently serving ministers)? If the Civil Service has not yet considered these matters, it needs to. Any guidance that exists, or is produced in future, should be made public.&#xa0;Collective responsibility&#xa0;13. The Ministerial Code iterates a key principle of UK government (that long predates the appearance of the code itself): the collective responsibility of ministers. In the words of paragraph 2.1 of the code: ‘The principle of collective responsibility, save where it is explicitly set aside, applies to all Government Ministers’. Paragraph 2.3 of the codes states:&#xa0;The internal process through which a decision has been made, or the level of Committee by which it was taken should not be disclosed. Decisions reached by the Cabinet or Ministerial Committees are binding on all members of the Government. They are, however, normally announced and explained as the decision of the Minister concerned. On occasion, it may be desirable to emphasise the importance of a decision by stating specifically that it is the decision of Her Majesty’s Government. This, however, is the exception rather than the rule.&#xa0;14. Paragraph 8.3 states that:&#xa0;Ministers should ensure that their statements are consistent with collective Government policy. Ministers should take special care in referring to subjects which are the responsibility of other Ministers.&#xa0;15. Absolute maintenance of these principles is difficult even under single-party government, given competition between ministers and party factions, and constant media scrutiny. The problems have intensified under the coalition. The present government has, on the one hand, a need to function effectively, necessitating a degree of cooperation between its different components. On the other hand, the two parties comprising the coalition also have an electoral need to differentiate themselves from each-other. This imperative has led to senior ministers appearing publicly to disavow decisions that must have been taken at Cabinet level and therefore should be subject to collective responsibility, for instance over health reforms early in the present Parliament. There is even a tendency for government members to list policy ideas emanating from the other party in the coalition they successfully vetoed; or conversely programmes they would like to have introduced but that their coalition partner prevented. These glimpses behind the curtain of collective responsibility, even if they are to an extent stage-managed between the parties, are difficult to reconcile with the Ministerial Code, and are problematic in themselves. They can create confusion about what present government policy is, including over crucial issues such as UK membership of the European Union. This doubt can in turn undermine confidence in the government, and make democratic accountability difficult.&#xa0;16. This rupture in collective responsibility is likely to widen as the General Election approaches, and campaigning becomes the overriding priority. Since it is difficult to imagine complete reversal of the tendency towards open dissent that has intensified under the coalition, it might be better swiftly to publish some rules of engagement. They could set out a framework enabling public representatives of parties – perhaps not ministers – to set out publicly what party policy was in contentious areas, stipulating the timing and form of such pronouncements, and who could make them.&#xa0;14 January 2014&#xa0;&#xa0;