&#xa0;Written evidence from ADEPT Traffic and Safety Working Group (SLC 061)&#xa0;Briefing Note for House of Commons Transport Committee re-Safety at Level Crossings&#xa0;ADEPT represents directors and senior managers within Local Authorities who are responsible for policy and service provision relating to Transportation, Planning and the Environment. The organisation is based around a structure of lead subject steering committees. The relevant committee to this subject is Transport Committee.A specialist group exists advising Transport Committee on road safety issues: this is known as the Traffic and Safety Working Group (TSWG). A representative of this group (Peter Atkins, Traffic Manager West Sussex County Council) was nominated to liaise and work with rail industry peers to drive forward and jointly develop a greater understanding and partnership working on road rail interface issues. These issues were a) level crossings, b) rail over road bridges and bridge strikes and c) road vehicle incursions on to the rail network. The latter item is predominantly lead by the ADEPT Bridges Group. Bridges Group provides specialist knowledge to the ADEPT Engineering Committee.The joint liaison group is Road Rail Interface Safety Group (RRISG) and ministered by the Rail Safety Standards Board (RSSB) on behalf of Network Rail.Peter Atkins is also supported in this liaison role by Brian Thompson of Lincolnshire County Council.&#xa0;&#xa0;It is generally felt that the basic information contained within the Highway Code is supportive of safety at level crossings. However, three items could benefit from improvement.&#xa0;&#xa0;At local level, liaison between highway and rail authorities is variable. The issue of level crossing safety initiated Network Rail to set up Road Rail Partnership Groups (RRPGs) across the country in an effort to facilitate joined up thinking particularly around problem locations. The success of these has wavered although network rail would state that they are in operation across the majority of the country. Although the intention has recently been to widen the remit of these groups to include bridge strikes and road vehicle incursions, this has not been widely realised. The principle reason for this in the author’s opinion is that the three topic areas are championed by different departments within Network Rail. As a highway authority, it has to be said that there is little visible evidence of cross working inside Network Rail.One safety related example concerns the policy of highway authorities ‘gritting’ over level crossings. Documented highway maintenance practice was based upon previous advice from network rail in that the salt distributed caused signal and track circuit failures. Over time some highway authorities have spread salt over level crossing surfaces on the basis that the risk to road users of not doing so is greater and, in the event of a collision where a road vehicle has skidded, could render the highway authority liable on the basis it had failed its duty of care under The Highway Act. Research sponsored jointly through the Rail Safety Standards Board (RSSB) failed to show any evidence that ‘gritting’ over level crossings was detrimental to signalling and track circuits and showed no failures or premature maintenance caused by corrosion of the rails. Thus, in the interests of interface safety Network Rail (Operations) agreed with highway authorities that ‘gritting’ should be carried out across level crossings. Network Rail (Signalling) was not satisfied by the research and vetoed the agreement. Two years on, highway authorities are still awaiting the conclusion of this internal debate.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]It would be jointly agreed by both highway and rail authorities that the best solution would be to have no level crossings (ie. road rail interface) at all. Very few, if any, level crossings have been designed and built in recent decades. The issues around road layout design are quite historic.Most level crossings were developed as a result of railway tracks authorised by Acts of Parliament needing to cross much smaller paths used by local travellers and villagers.  There was no motorised traffic; most being horse drawn or pedestrian. Consequently, the infrastructure around a crossing point has grown with evolution of towns and cities. Much infrastructure is now in place such that to redesign an ideal road layout would require an unacceptable political will and significant budget to purchase large plots of land with, in many cases, property demolition.To sum up the current status it could be said that in 99% of all locations, knowing what we know today about transport and starting with a clean sheet, engineers would not design the road/rail layouts we find today.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]Examples shared between Network Rail and highway authorities have often showed that rail interface safety considerations do not feature heavily on the checklist of Local Planning Authorities. It is believed that Network Rail, who are often (but not always) consulted regarding planning applications have frequently made a response that indicates there is a potential increase in safety risk associated with a particular application. Regrettably, since the assessment of that risk is either not understood by those considering planning applications or they perceive the risk to be small (usually based upon frequency alone rather than a consideration of consequence of an incident – eg. fatality), the concerns are waived and planning permission is granted with little or no mitigation conditions imposed upon developers. This is particularly a concern where there are existing nearby public footpaths that cross the railway which may expose the dangers of the railway to unsupervised children residing in a new development.&#xa0;&#xa0;The issue here is one of cost. Often the likely costs of the improvements required to the infrastructure will far exceed the level of s106 monies available. There is also a tendency for Local Planning Authorities to direct s106 monies towards more visible, tangible and popular local projects.&#xa0;&#xa0;It is the experience of the authors that there is no regular stream of feedback to highway authorities. In most cases any such follow up would rely upon the local working relationship between road and rail authorities. The most useful process for feedback was via the RRISG meetings where reports and data from incidents, near misses and investigations from Network Rail, British Transport Police (BTP) and Rail Accident Investigation Branch (RAIB) could be thoroughly debated and conclusions/recommendations could be agreed.&#xa0;&#xa0;The route for undertaking research was, again, through the RRISG. Suggestions for research from both road and rail sectors would be proposed, managed and carried out by RSSB. Highway authority safety budgets are much reduced over the last five years and a pay-back is always sought in terms of casualty reduction. The bare truth is that there are more fatalities caused by road vehicles collisions outside the road rail interface and consequently there are no local authority funds available for research work in this area.&#xa0;The comments above indicate that there is much work that needs to continue between both road and rail authorities and associated bodies, such as BTP, DfT and Train Operators. The UK has the best safety record in the world and this is because the subject is treated with the seriousness it deserves and has willing contributors to joint working to maintain this record. It would be dangerous to approach this subject area with complacency.However, ADEPT must express its concern that Network Rail has unilaterally decided to withdraw its commissioning of RSSB in administering the RRISG. This has been superseded by two separate groups to be managed by Network Rail. As yet there is no approach from Network Rail to include highway authorities in either of these groups. This will undoubtedly result in isolation and silo working by the two industries. Risking the very basis of the UK excellence as described above.&#xa0;&#xa0;Peter Atkins, West Sussex County Council&#xa0;Brian Thompson, Lincolnshire County Council&#xa0;December 2013&#xa0;