&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted by Professor Richard ]]]

[[[Tedder]]]

[[[ (BTO0023)]]]I remain as ever deeply concerned about the weight attached to the detection of "abnormal" PrP staining in appendix tissue. I had not realised in spite of my concerns that in fact the intensity of the revealing reagents used in the appendix studies appears to be able to differentiate between appendix PrPsc and vCJDsc. This deviation from normal fluorescence signal seems to be more common in the second appendix study than the first, is this truly due to differences in fixation or is it that the phenotypic expression of epitopes on PrPsc differs in what is seen in the appendix tissue and in vCJD tissue? Setting this anomaly aside, I think it is worth considering the numbers game.For ease of calculation, if we consider the prevalence to be one in 2000 this would suggest in the region of 30,000 infected individuals in the UK, all asymptomatic and assuming that the appendix 1 study covering 1995 to 1999 is giving substantially the same prevalence as the appendix to study, all have been running for at least 10 years with no signs of disease progression. This includes about half of this number in the MM phenotype. This is not impossible but is it really the case? Whilst I sympathise with Simon’s view that an earlier tranche of appendix samples taken years before the BSE epizootic is not going to alter the observations of the appendix 1 and 2 studies, if the follicular dendritic staining is detected at a similar prevalence prior to the BSE epizootic, it surely will greatly alter the interpretation and attribution of significance to the one in 2000 prevalence concept. What it will mean from a transfusion point of view is that the presence of PrPsc in the appendix does not imply transmissibility of a TSE from blood donors to recipients as the transmission experiment has already been conducted over the intervening 30 years.Turning this around if we anticipate that since the mid-1990s, again using the one in 2000 prevalence figure, transmissions have been occurring as a result of exposure to blood components the question has to be asked where are the secondary cases? On an annual recurrent basis of 2 million donations a year, generating around an extra 50% exposure through the manufacture of 1.5 components per donation, and then allowing for 50% of recipients dying before the effluxion of a TSE incubation period one would have expected 20 years worth of transmission from a recurrent annual exposure to involve somewhere between 800 and 1000 recipients per year. Sourcing from abroad plasma&#xa0; for fractionation, excluding previous transfusion recipients will have little or no impact on these figures and it is leuco-depletion alone which may render these exposures unable to transmit. Over a 20 year period this would suggest somewhere in the region of 15 to 20,000 exposed persons. This is also possible but is it probable?The final issue relates to the need for a blood test to comply with the IVDD and the utility of such a test. There is likely to remain derogation even for class D diagnostics where there is not a commercial assay available, or where if one is available it is perceived to be unfit for purpose. Used either as a screening test or as a diagnostic assay this derogation can be applied. I would suggest that either this is explained in more detail in the text or any reference to the IVDD is remaindered. The meeting where this was discussed a year ago in relation to a prevalence study foundered on a number of important issues including both specificity and sensitivity and the requirement for a plausible protocol able to define the biological meaning of a reaction in a screening test. For this reason any prevalence study has to be absolutely anonymised and will still produce data whose significance remains uncertain. Though it may be wise to separate the use of any testing protocol into anonymised prevalence surveys on one side and clinical diagnostic use on the other, to me there is an irrefutable need to be able to attach biological significance to the reaction of an assay no matter how it is used. As an analogy this is the same uncomfortable position we are in with the appendix surveys where currently we do not have an algorithm for confirmatory testing which is appropriate and sensitive enough to interrogate the biological importance of appendix staining.You will realise that these are merely the views of a clinical virologist.January 2014&#xa0;&#xa0;