&#xa0;

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Written Evidence submitted by NHS Blood and Transplant]]]

[[[ (BTO0026)]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]Background

[[[&#xa0;]]]1. NHS Blood and TransplantNHS Blood and Transplant (NHSBT) is a Special Health Authority that includes, amongst its statutory obligations, an obligation to ‘promote or secure the effective transplantation of organs and tissues for the purposes of the health service’. As such, NHSBT supports both living and deceased organ donation, although living organ donation is regulated by the Human Tissue Authority. NHSBT works in close collaboration with healthcare professionals and professional bodies, devolved administrations and regulatory authorities, and is responsible for the identification and characterisation of potential donors, obtaining consent (or authorisation in Scotland) from the family for organ and tissue donation and offering those donated organs to surgeons for patients on the national transplant list. 1.1 Many organisations are involved in the

[[[ ]]]delivery of organ donation and transplantation in the UK but NHSBT plays a central role in working with clinicians, professional bodies, commissioners, regulators and national health departments as well as lay members, patients and patient groups, to improve the service to UK patients.  1.2

[[[ ]]]The policies for patient selection and organ allocation are developed by the Solid Organ Advisory Groups, which include representation from health care professionals involved in transplantation, after consultation with patients, patient groups and charities and other interested parties. These policies are reviewed and, after agreement, implemented by the Transplant Review Committee, a sub-group of the NHSBT Board. Clinical Governance and Outcome monitoring is led by NHSBT, working n close collaboration with clinicians, commissioners, regulators and national health departments.1.3

[[[ ]]]As a consequence of implementation of the recommendations of the Organ Donor Task Force, the number of deceased donors has increased year on year: there were 936 deceased donors in the UK between 1st April 2013 and 15th December 2013, (compared with 817 in the same period last in 2012), resulting in 2,483 solid organ transplants. The number of people waiting for a solid organ transplant as of 15th December is 7,083 (data from NHSBT www.odt.nhs.uk). The availability of organs is insufficient to meet the demands. 2. Transplants save lives and improve quality of life and save the NHS moneySolid organ transplants are not only life saving and life enhancing but save the NHS money as dialysis is more expensive than transplantation. 3. The consequence of organ shortageKidney transplantation is offered mainly for those on dialysis and for the 5,767 people awaiting a deceased donor kidney transplant.  The average waiting time is just over 3 years. For other organs, such as liver, heart or lung, the transplants are done to save life. Selection criteria are developed, in part, to restrict access to the transplant list to ensure that those who are listed have a realistic expectation of being offered a graft, yet even with such restricted access to the transplant list, up to 20% of the 503 people currently listed for a liver graft and 490 people currently listed for a heart or lung transplant (as of 15th December 2013) become too sick or die before a suitable graft is available. If more grafts were available, more people would be listed, fewer would die awaiting a graft and more lives would be saved and improved.4. Organs are biomaterials and therefore carry risk which can be mitigated but not abolishedOrgans are from humans and carry risk: these risks include the inadvertent transmission of some infections and cancer as well as other conditions such as metabolic and autoimmune diseases. NHSBT has issued guidance to ensure that potential transplant recipients are given appropriate information on the risks associated with transplantation (as well as the benefits) and so they can give fully informed consent.5. Use of donated organs requires a risk assessmentThe risks associated with organ transplantation (including inadvertent transmission of disease) must be balanced against the risks of death without a transplant. The risks can and are mitigated but cannot be abolished. In the limited time between death being declared or treatment considered futile and agreement made for treatment to be withdrawn, families must be asked for and give consent (or authorisation in Scotland) and then an assessment made to assess associated risk. This assessment includes review of the medical and social history (obtained from the hospital records, family and family doctor), review of previous available investigations and agreed screening tests for viruses and other infections, cancer and the state of the organs. Information is made available to the recipient surgeon according to agreed protocols and the surgeon must decide whether to accept the organ for a given patient (who will have given informed consent). Furthermore, the degree of risk taken will depend not only on the donor and organ characteristics but also the recipient: for example, a liver from a donor with a risk of cancer transmission may be accepted for a person in acute liver failure and so expected to die within three days if no graft were available but declined for a recipient with end-stage cirrhosis who has a life expectation without transplantation, of 8 months.6. There are national and international protocols for donor characterisationDonor characterisation is the process by which information is sought and made available for risk assessment. The information includes a medical, social and travel history taken from the clinical staff, the hospital records, the family and, where possible, the family doctor. The available investigations are reviewed and additional tests requested. The tests required for donor characterisation have been described by a variety of international and national bodies, including the Advisory Committee on the Safety of Blood, Tissues and Organs (SaBTO), the Council of Europe and professional organisations. The characterisation of donors is regulated by the Human Tissue Authority under the European Union Directive on Organ Donation.6.1

[[[ ]]]The microbiological investigations requested by NHSBT are wider than required under the EU Directive but  include routinely Hepatitis B and C viruses, Cytomegalovirus, Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Human T-lymphocytic virus, syphilis, and Epstein-Barr virus. Tests for other infectious agents, such as malaria, Trypanosomiasis cruzi or West Nile virus will be requested as clinically indicated e.g. on the basis of travel history. 6.2

[[[ ]]]These guidelines and regulations all recognise that the decision to use organs involves balancing risks. They also recognise that not all possible information will be available, because of the limitations of available investigations and the time required for some blood tests and, furthermore, that some blood tests may fail to detect infection or may wrongly diagnose infection.7. Absolute contra-indications for organ donationNHSBT, in collaboration with professional organisations and clinicians, have agreed a short list of absolute contra-indications to organ donation (http://odt.nhs.uk/pdf/contraindications_to_organ_donation.pdf). These include a definite, probable or possible case of human TSE, including CJD and vCJD, individuals whose blood relatives have had familial CJD, other neurodegenerative diseases associated with infectious agents, TB: active and untreated and HIV disease (but not HIV infection). Other contra-indications include widespread cancers and untreated sepsis.8. Risks of prion transmission by organ transplantationIt is recognised that sporadic CJD has been transmitted by transplantation of corneal tissue and dura mater in a very small number of cases. We are not aware of any case of prion transmission by solid organ transplantation in the UK or elsewhere. We are, however, not complacent. We recognise the potential possibility that prion transmission may occur as a consequence of organ transmission and, as with any surgical procedure, surgical instruments used in retrieval or implantation may transmit disease to other patients. We also recognise the potential for immunosuppressive agents, required to prevent graft loss, could have an impact on prion disease progression, although whether that impact is positive or negative is unknown. We also appreciate that any lack of appearance of the effect of prion infection may not yet be apparent in the transplant population because of the incubation times.&#xa0;&#xa0;9. Mitigation of risk of prion transmission by organ donation and transplantationA number of steps are in place to mitigate the risks of prion transmission. Specialist Nurses in Organ Donation are highly trained by NHSBT and follow well documented protocols, specifically seeking information about risks of, amongst other issues, exposure to possible prion-contaminated material and a personal or family history of unexplained degenerative neurological disease. This level of inquiry is much deeper and wider than for living patients undergoing routine or emergency surgery.9.1

[[[ ]]]It should be noted that people dying from any cause of degenerative neurological disease are unlikely to become organ donors because their mode of death usually renders them unlikely to be candidates for organ donation.9.2

[[[ ]]]Should a solid organ recipient develop a known donor transmitted disease, clinicians are obliged under the terms of their licence, to report this to NHSBT who will investigate whether any other people received an organ from that donor and ensure that there is a full investigation and appropriate reporting.10. Risks of cancer transmissionOrgan donation is also associated with the risk of inadvertent transmission of cancer and there are national and international guidelines to support the surgeon in making a decision. 10.1

[[[ ]]]In some cases, the presence or past history of cancer is known at the time of donation or a cancer is detected at the time of retrieval or preparation of the organ for implantation.A decision whether or not to use organs from such donors will depend on many factors including the type of cancer, the stage of cancer, the treatment given and the interval between treatment and death. In many cases, the presence of cancer in the transplanted organs is unknown at the time of donation and transplantation. Indeed, a recent review of the UK experience showed that in all cases (fewer than 0.05% transplants) of transmitted cancer, the presence of tumour was not known at the time of donation.11. Transmission of other conditionsBoth metabolic and autoimmune conditions can be transmitted by organ transplantation.  These occur rarely: in the last 12 months, NHSBT has been informed of one case of transmitted autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura and one case of acute intermittent porphyria.12. Balance of risksNHSBT takes its responsibilities very seriously but for organ transplantation, the balance of risks for the patient is quite different to that of blood and tissues. The number of deaths and removals (because of failing health) from the national waiting list and the poor quality of life of those awaiting a transplant mean that any reduction in the donor pool will have an adverse impact on the patients and their family: the removal of just one donor will mean, on average, that 3 or 4 people will be denied a transplant and maybe one will die. 13. The Organ Donation Strategy (Taking Transplantation to 2020)The initial strategy for NHSBT was set by the Organ Donation Task Force; this group made a number of recommendations to improve organ donation in the UK. The Task Force claimed that, if all the recommendations were implemented, then a 50% increase in the number of deceased organ donors should be achieved in 5 years. This target was reached on time in April 2013. To follow, the initial strategy, a new organ donation strategy – Taking Organ Transplantation to 2020 - was developed after widespread consultation with lay, patient and professional groups and advice from international organisations. This new strategy was signed off by ministers from all four national health departments and was launched in 2013. It is a strategy for the whole UK and not just for NHSBT. The new strategy focuses on increasing the number of solid organ transplants and improving the outcome for the patients. 14. Transplantation rates can be increased without reduction in qualityThe UK has the second highest family refusal rate for consent/authorisation for organ donation in Europe (at 46%), so the greatest gain in the number of transplants will come from reducing this refusal rate. Some other European countries (such as Spain) have refusal rates of 10% or less. Furthermore, over the last 6 years, the UK has had an increase of nearly 60% in the number of deceased donors, and this is associated with an improving survival following transplantation showing that the increase in organ donation is not at the expense of worse outcomes for patients showing that increased activity need not come at the expense of reducing quality.14.1

[[[ ]]]The new organ donation strategy does include an aim to increase the use of higher risk organs. This aim refers to those organs that might be less likely to function and calls for research to improve the quality of organs (such as normothermic pulsatile organ perfusion or normothermic regional perfusion): the strategy nowhere encourages the greater use of organs from potential donors with the risk of transmitting infection or other disease or lowering the standard assessment of donors.14.2

[[[ ]]]It must be stressed that implementation of this Strategy does in no way imply any lowering of standards; indeed, the Strategy requires NHSBT and others to work to raise the quality of donated organs.15. Summary1.               The potential for solid organ transplants to transmit diseases is accepted and many               processes are in place to mitigate this risk. 2.               NHSBT and the donation and transplant communities are not complacent about               these risks.3               It must be recognised that the use of organs for transplantation involves balancing               risks: the risk of inadvertent disease transmission is currently very low (less than 1%)               while the death rate without transplantation approaches 20% for some organs.  4.               NHSBT works closely with both national and international organisations to ensure               standards in the UK are at least as good as those in other countries.5.              The new organ donation strategy builds on the success of the last 5 years and aims to increase the number and quality of transplants but this               does not mean an increase in risk of disease transmission.January 2014&#xa0;