                            DIS 50The Australian Government’s approach to ensuring people with disability benefit from our aid program is set out in the strategy document, Development for All: Towards a disability-inclusive Australian aid program 2009-2014 (Development for All). The strategy aims to ensure that people with disability are included in and benefit equally from Australia’s aid program.  In 2011-2012 Australia provided AUD 108.7 million to improve the quality of life for people with disability throughout the aid program.Development for All is informed by the principles of Article 32 of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, including non-discrimination, full and effective participation and inclusion in society, and equality of opportunity and accessibility.  In 2013 the OECD Development Assistance Committee Peer Review highlighted Australia’s ‘exceptional emphasis on disability which makes it a leader in this area internationally’.    Australia’s success in this area has been supported by strong (and bipartisan) political leadership and commitment as well as clear direction from the Executive of AusAID (now the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT)).In developing the strategy, comprehensive consultations were undertaken with a wide range of stakeholders including people with disability in our partner countries, and their families.  This has reaped real benefits in terms of internal and external commitment to the strategy, as well as its relevance. Ensuring an active central role by people with disability is a guiding principle of the Development for All strategy, and including people with disability in aid program decision making has contributed to more effective programming.  A Disability-Inclusive Development Reference Group was established in 2009 to provide high-level guidance on the implementation of the Development for All strategy.  This Group includes international and Australian leaders in disability-inclusive development, several of whom themselves have a disability. Most recently, the Australian Government announced on December 3, 2013 that a new disability-inclusive development strategy would be prepared in 2014.  The focus of the new strategy will be consistent with Australia’s broader aid strategy to promote poverty reduction through sustainable economic development by building skills, creating jobs and fostering economic growth in the Indo-Pacific region. In addition to a strategic focus on our region, the Australian Government will also be strengthening performance measures and introducing rigorous benchmarks to make sure our aid program is delivered as efficiently and effectively as possible.&#xa0;A dedicated team in DFAT, the Disability Policy Section, provides advice and guidance to staff in integrating disability concerns into aid programs.  In addition, regional specialist positions based in Fiji, to cover the Pacific region; and Cambodia, to cover the Mekong and Philippines; have raised the profile of disability-inclusive development in their respective regions and are seen as a valuable resource by our country programs.  The Department’s disability-inclusive development focal points are staff who have volunteered to play an advocacy and advice role on disability-inclusive development issues within their teams, and who are trained and supported to play this role.  Around sixty focal points are located in policy areas in Canberra and at 15 overseas posts.A series of guidance notes provides policy direction for staff.  Guidance notes finalised to date include a handbook for accessible design (with a focus on physical accessibility of the built environment) and a note on disability-inclusion in social protection programs.  Work is underway on a disability-inclusive education note.  Australian Government support to build the leadership skills of disabled people’s organisations (DPOs) and people with disability, including through the Pacific Disability Forum, Disability Rights Fund and scholarships schemes, is assisting people with disability to advocate for greater inclusion of people with disability within their countries and to demonstrate the contributions that people with disability can make.  Australia recognises that there is limited evidence internationally on what works in relation to disability-inclusive development.  DFAT is assisting to build the evidence base by supporting relevant research.  The lack of data on people with disability has also been regularly raised by our country programs as a barrier to getting governments to take this issue seriously.  We are looking at opportunities to support inclusion of questions on disability within upcoming censuses in partner countries, and are supporting work to improve internationally comparable data, such as through the World Health Organisation’s development of a model disability survey.The interaction of efforts to prevent disability (for example, through activities which tackle avoidable blindness or clear land mines) with disability-inclusive development can be a sensitive issue.  In line with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Australian Government’s work to promote disability-inclusive development is focused on improving the quality of life for people with existing disability, rather than disability prevention activities.  Prevention of disability, while an important public health objective, is not the same as disability-inclusive development, and there has been criticism of the Development for All strategy from some stakeholders for its inclusion of prevention within a broader disability-inclusive development strategy.  To respond to these concerns, prevention activities have been managed outside of the Disability Policy Section since 2011, in health, infrastructure and mine action sections.  Australia works closely with the UK on disability-inclusive development, including through the current secondment of a DFID officer to DFAT’s Disability Policy Section, for two years from July 2013.Further information is available on the DFAT website, at: http://aid.dfat.gov.au/aidissues/did/Pages/home.aspx

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;