&#xa0;Written evidence submitted by Lakeside Cross Disability Self Help Group&#xa0;Before I start with my response to these questions, I want to congratulate you for your kind support and to recognize the inclusion of everyone in society. We are Lakeside Cross Disability Self Help Group, a Community Based Organization of persons with disabilities in very remote community in Ghana.DRF is one organization that works inclusively to support much marginalized group of persons with disabilities to promote the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities. DRF focuses on building the capacity of marginalized groups. With the support from DRF, we have been able to form several Self Help Groups, liaise with government, CSOs and other NGOs for better collaboration. With this regard DRF has supported us train all leaders and provided them with the necessary skills that will enable them identify challenges in their own communities and find appropriate strategies of resolving them among themselves and their stakeholders. Some Organizations do not support small groups like Lakeside with the perception that they have low level of education and are not enlightened on issues. With DRF we have made tremendous advancement through the grant support and have lobbied for greater opportunities for PWDs. We want to say much development would not have been made without DRF. We appreciate your support to DRF.&#xa0;It is quite difficult to say much of this question as we do not really know a lot of DFID’s work outside DRF. However if programs are constructed to involve persons with disabilities and to involve them in decision making process it will help the disability community. I humbly suggest that DRF’ response to this question will be useful.Again we do not know much of your relationship with government concerning the implementation of the UNCRPD, however in relation to my home country much need to be done concerning the implementation of the CRPD. Organizations that get funds to work at the national level must have strong collaboration with other CBOs, CSOs and NGOs to fight for the implementation. If more training could be organized for grantee organizations on how to build very strong voice to fight for the implementation of the UNCRPD. In our own small way we are doing very well but l think it will be good to share your wider experience with us s o that we are able to ensure and great push for the implementation.&#xa0;We would be grateful if DRF could respond to this particular question.&#xa0;Thanks and we hope to respond to any concern or clarification you may want to seek.&#xa0;&#xa0;