&#xa0;Written evidence submitted by Professor Jane Dacre, former Medical Director MRCP(UK), until December 2013, and Director UCL Medical School, London.&#xa0;I have recently visited Myanmar in my capacity as the Medical Director of the MRCP(UK) examination. This is a well-known international examination for Physicians, run by the Federation of Medical Royal Colleges in the UK. The examination has a total of 24,000 candidates world-wide per year. In November 2013, the clinical component of the examination, the Practical Assessment of Clinical Examination Skills (PACES) was successfully introduced to Myanmar, following a pathfinder exercise which was extremely well received.This has allowed the building of close working relationships with local physicians, and has led to a productive and on-going dialogue, and a degree of understanding of the difficulties being experienced by the Myanmar doctors and their patients. Whilst in Myanmar, we had the privilege of meeting Daw Aung San Suu Khi, and hearing her plans for the rejuvenation of the Yangon General Hospital. This is a very important landmark in Myanmar’s history,  and a crucial tertiary care centre for local people with low incomes. We visited the hospital, which is in significant disrepair, requiring a complete (and very costly) refurbishment package to update it to modern (NHS level) standards. She is keen to make progress on this.Colleagues working in Myanmar, both from Yangon and other cities are working under extremely difficult conditions, using out of date educational methods in system which appears overwhelmed and under regulated compared to the UK. In addition, their opportunities for medical research have dwindled over the past two decades, and it is recognised that medical education is stronger when coupled with research.  In my opinion, they need support to rebuild a health system which is appropriate to their local context. This would be most likely to be achieved by investment in the medical education system, and the appropriate regulation of medical education.  Medical Schools in the UK have recently increased their international reach, and have increasing experience of supporting overseas institutions to improve their curricula and assessment systems.  Investment in academic support from these institutions would give the opportunity for a locally led and embedded project to raise and modernise the health system in a locally appropriate manner in Myanmar.Discussions have been held between UCL Medical School (Professor Dacre), and the Royal College of Physicians of London (Professor David Warrell), who are very keen to move forward with plans to develop undergraduate and postgraduate training support, and to explore the rebuilding of research capacity in Myanmar.  Currently, however, this is not possible due to lack of funds, and would need investment. It has been difficult to find a funding source that supports this kind of development. Support is often tailored to traditional research projects, and infrastructure.  UCL Medical School has just submitted a bid, with colleagues in Myanmar, to a joint initiative by the ESRC, MRC, UK-aid and the Wellcome Trust, to conduct a piece of qualitative educational research to look at local educational needs. If funded, this would provide a clearer picture of the local medical education situation, and would provide evidence for redevelopment. However, these research funds rarely fund educational research, so the bid may not be successful.In summary, I suggest that investment in the local medical education system, with support from the UK to provide context specific education and training is likely to pave the way for more sustainable improvements in the health system in resource poor countries, and in particular, in Myanmar. My understanding from local Myanmar medical colleagues is that this would be positively received, both by the local doctors, the Universities, and the Ministry of Health. January 2014&#xa0;