&#xa0;Written evidence from Daniel Salt (TWR0005)&#xa0;Dear Mrs EllmanI am writing in response to the select committee meeting that happened today involving both Gatwick and Easyjet company representatives.After reading the article in the Telegraph outlining the interchanges between Easyjet and Gatwick (Link below) I felt that I had to contact you.My wife and I were passengers that were due to depart from Gatwick on Christmas Eve morning and I thought that you might be interested to find out our story to compare to what you appear to have been given.At around 6:00 we entered the airport to find the lighting on but little else. We then attempted to find out what was happening but could find no Gatwick staff that knew what was happening (mostly cleaners). We then attempted to find Easyjet staff who were even more visible in their absence and joined the queue snaking around from the check in desks used by them. Sometime later we were asked to move away from this area by an Easyjet staff member who said that they would need this space to try and check people in shortly. We were also informed that Easyjet and Gatwick were in a crisis meeting that information would be forthcoming. None was. During this time I continued to ask Gatwick staff who by this stage had been flooded into the terminal in large numbers what was happening and each time was told that most other airlines were manually checking travellers in but Gatwick had no idea what Easyjet were doing. An hour later I along with several other members of the public lost our temper at an Easyjet staff member and demanded that a senior member of staff come down and explain what was happening only to be told that someone had. When I asked where I was told that they had spoken in the area we had been told to vacate.Through the morning Easyjet staff began to call flights on an ad hoc basis though when questioned noone would tell us what process was being used and why some flights were going and some not. At approximately 12 noon all Easyjet staff vacated the terminal leaving a sea of people sitting on the ground with no idea what was happening and when questioned no Gatwick staff understood what was happening. At approximately 14:00 Easyjet cancelled some flights and called all other travellers to the other terminal via the train system. Obviously taking a terminal full of people and sending them to another terminal full of people simply led to gridlock, one which was obvious which many other travellers predicted before arriving. After fighting our way through the people we managed to get around to the Easyjet check in desks to hear them cancel further flights but with no clear idea what they wanted everyone else to do. By this time nearly all other Easyjet staff had left the terminal and we were told to queue at another check in desk. This queue rapidly deteriorated as no one had any idea what was happening and Gatwick staff least of all and it took armed police to attempt to put some order to the chaos. No Easyjet staff could be found. Sometime later at approximately 16:00 Gatwick staff (I think) began calling travellers forward using a loud hailer and booking people in, sending them back to the other terminal using the train system. We then passed through security and waited for our flight.At 18:30 our flight number on the electronic boards requested we go to information for further information. When we arrived we found again no Easyjet staff and more armed police attempted to answer questions. We were informed the flight was cancelled and told to exit departures via a route at the end of the terminal. After passing back through immigration we then went down to baggage reclaim finding half the lights off and again no staff from either Gatwick or Easyjet. Sometime later approximately 20 or more flights worth of baggage was sent down two reclaim chutes for people to stack in larger and larger amounts around in order to allow more down. After approximately two hours later we found our bag and managed to leave through customs finding one Easyjet staff member handing letters blaming the weather and stating that there were limited hotels.For the record there were at the beginning of the day far more Gatwick staff than Easyjet. Easyjet failed at every stage to notify the public of what was happening and what they were doing to rectify it. They also failed to notify anyone of their rights to compensation or to cancel the flights. The transportation of customers didn’t appear to an issue as the monorail was working correctly.During the later half of the day and evening I saw grown adults crying from stress and exhaustion and children in what appeared to be a state of shock. I was also asked by any number of foreign travellers why the UK could run their second largest airport like this. I had no answer except to say that I was extremely ashamed which I was and am. I have travelled around the world to many countries both developed and undeveloped and I have never been treated so badly. A national disgrace.I have attached pictures of the chaos and frankly both Easyjet and Gatwick should have their operating licenses should be revoked as I could not see any contingency planning from either company. If not for flooding for what to do if people could not fly. I also cannot think with no staff from either company how that was a safe environment one fire and would have had 10,000 burnt to death.&#xa0;January 2014&#xa0;&#xa0;