&#xa0;Written evidence from Dr Lilly Evans (TWR0006)&#xa0;I am very surprised that in the evidence session today there was no one from either Sussex Police nor representative of passengers caught up in Gatwick North Terminal power cut.&#xa0;I was one of those stranded with my husband on arrival from Funchal. Contrary to Gatwick CEO evidence our aircraft was diverted from South Terminal to land in North Terminal area. &#xa0;I can go on with full descriptions but suffice to say that from 4.30pm to 10pm on Christmas Eve passengers were sent through Immigration in North Terminal with numbers building up in luggage hall which was 3/4 in the dark with only two carousels working. There was no sign of any airport staff. Sussex Police were there from the start and helpful as they could be without airport staff providing any information to them either. They brought in more officers to help organise passengers in taking off luggage coming in total disarray at carousels. &#xa0;There were no facilities of any kind for trapped passengers, many with small children. I have taken pictures showing families sitting on the ground with small kids sleeping on the floor.&#xa0;I have contacted Customer Services at Gatwick and the Office of Gatwick Airport owner company Non Executive Director tasked with doing internal audit to offer input and help. Predictably there has been no response from either a week on.&#xa0;I should say that my extensive experience as management consultant in large corporate organisational process review and drawing lessons to be learnt for the future led me to conclude that behaviour of the Gatwick management was dereliction of duty and could have had serious consequences.&#xa0;It is possible to find a number of people who were at the Terminal at the time through social media. In addition, I do not think that Gatwick Airport CEO explained the way various outsourced services on the ground operate. As each has a specific and limited contract there was no coordination between them as no one had any authority to change what they usually do. It was painfully clear that no proper major accident reaction exercise has ever been carried out by Gatwick Airport and that their chain of command in emergencies is dysfunctional.&#xa0;Finally, why was CAA representative not involved in the evidence session? I have looked at the contracts they are developing with UK airport operators and the title which starts with 'Economic Contract' tells you where is their priorities lie. Airports are not primarily shopping malls but terminals for arriving and departing airplanes. Without passengers they have very little utility. However, passengers comfort and safety appear to be demoted below the profit!&#xa0;January 2014&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;