&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence from Alex Sully (CYS0137)]]]

[[[Cycle proofing, cycle audit and the need for the training of professionals]]]Alex Sully is consultant with 27 years’ experience of providing for cyclists through planning, designing for and promoting cycling. His past experience includes being a member of the English Regions Cycling Development Team and as a consultant to Cycling England as part of its Professional Advice Team. The latter team, including Alex, gave advice to local authorities in England across a range of policy, infrastructure and promotional issues. As part of his responsibilities he also wrote much of Cycling England’s technical guidance and has contributed to DfT primary guidance as well as writing guidance and policy documents for local authorities here and in Ireland.He is well known as a Continuing Professional Development (CPD) registered trainer with clients at home and abroad that have included DfT, DOT Ireland and local authorities. Overseas training has been undertaken for an Italian university, EU funded information exchange programme and Irish and Polish local authorities. He is also the author and tutor for the UK’s only distance learning course (at Master’s level) in the field of designing infrastructure for cyclists.1.1              The undertaking of Cycle Proofing / Cycle Audits is an essential way of ensuring that any changes to the highway network are not only safe for cyclists but, where possible, positively encourage more people to cycle more often. There is already DfT supported guidance on this subject and no more is need, just its application.1.2              Such audits should not be combined with Safety Audits as their objects are not the same. Safety audits confine themselves only to issues of safety and are not obliged to identify ways in which schemes can be improved to achieve the key objectives of Cycle Proofing/Audits. An example is highlighted that shows that other countries have made such procedures mandatory and if not followed can put the future of a scheme into jeopardy. 1.3              The submission includes a case study which seeks to explain to the committee why the absence of such procedures leads to unsafe schemes. It suggests that the issues highlighted could be avoided through the creation of a properly trained workforce that knows about and follows best practice. This situation can be addressed by encouraging authorities to increase the skill levels of their staff through suitable training.1.4              Finally, the submission sets out an easily adopted principle of how such audit procedures and training could be funded from scheme costs without too great a burden on an individual project thus ensuring value for money. Again, an overseas example of where this is applied is included.This submission recommends the following:&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The undertaking of a Cycle Audit should be adopted by the industry as best practice for all changes to the highway network (Safety Audits are not compulsory for the local road network but are seen as an essential part of scheme development to ensure user safety);&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The government should inform all local highway authorities that it expects this practice to be adopted even if this fall short of compulsion;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The government should inform local highway authorities that it expects that the costs of Cycle Audits should be met from individual project costs;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; The government should inform local highway authorities that they may meet the costs of raising the skills of their staff from scheme costs, both capital and revenue, where the training demonstrably contributes to the delivery of best practice throughout those schemes.&#xa0;3.1              Improving the quality of local roads through the introduction of suitable infrastructure and the reduction of the volume and speed of traffic is widely accepted as a key part of delivering a safe, cycle-friendly environment. Whilst it may not always be possible to retro-fit solutions into some existing streets, there are few reasons why new roads and other changes to the highway network should not be made as cycle-friendly as possible.3.2              This process has recently become known as ‘Cycle Proofing’. However, in 1998 a perfectly suitable means of achieving this was set out in the DfT supported Chartered Institution of Highways and Transportation (CIHT) document ‘Cycle Audit and Review’. Sadly, very few highway authorities took up its recommendations. It is generally accepted that this was because Cycle Audit became associated with the Cycle Review process (a means of establishing levels of service for cyclists). This was considered by many to be overly resource intensive and hence, expensive. As a consequence many did not look more closely at Cycle Audit and its benefits.3.3              Some local authorities have responded by creating their own checklists. Sometimes combined with pedestrian audits or full non-motorised user audits (NMUs) which include the needs of those with mobility impairments as well as equestrians. A number of the latter have been drawn up but again have not always been fully employed because of the perception that they are too time consuming to implement. As an indicator, many of the associated documents amount to hundreds of pages.3.4              A number of authorities have gone a different route and incorporated their Cycle Audit procedures into their Safety Audits. At first sight this might seem a laudable approach, however, it is most emphatically not. The reason is simple: they are two entirely separate processes and should be performed as such. In common with a Cycle Audit a Safety Audit is a structured process. However, it looks only at the safety aspects of changes to the highway. It is not obliged to offer suggestions as how the highway might be improved as a means of encouraging more cycling. Whilst this may ensure cyclist safety, it does not achieve the key objectives of a Cycle Audit which is to look at the scheme to “ensure that opportunities to encourage cycling are considered and that cycling conditions are not inadvertently made worse”. Opportunities might include exempting cyclists from a banned turn or road closure. Stopping conditions becoming worse might involve introducing a signal controlled junction instead of a roundabout on a route on which cycling is to be encouraged. This solution would remove a disincentive to cycling and improve cycle safety.3.5              On the basis that Cycle Proofing / Auditing is a good thing, how do we get it adopted by local authorities? At present there is no compulsion and decisions are left to local authorities. This is in contrast to Ireland where the government, through its Department of Transport, has seen fit to tell highway authorities (Circular RLR 16/2008) that it expects NMUs to be undertaken for changes to the non-national roads “funded or co-funded by the Department”. It goes further than simply asking, the circular states “Should the … procedure not be followed this may result in delay or 

[[[with]]]

[[[drawal of funding for the scheme]]]” (bold text in original document). 3.6              The UK government may think it has offered words of encouragement that will change highway authority’s attitude to this subject. In the press release ‘Government shifts cycling up a gear’ issued by the DfT on 12th August 2013 is the statement “The announcement includes a commitment from the government to cut red tape that can stifle cycle-friendly road design and to encourage changes to the way roads are built or altered. Councils will be expected to up their game to deliver infrastructure that takes cycling into account from the design stage.” However, in the same press release the prime minister is personally quoted as saying “New trunk road schemes that have a significant impact on cyclists, such as junction improvements or road-widening, will be ‘cycle-proofed’ so they can be navigated confidently by the average cyclist.” Unwittingly he has given local authorities a ‘get out of jail free’ card here since this only applies to the national road network and not the local one. Whatever the intention of this statement, in times of cut backs, such wording will inevitably be scrutinised and used by some as a reason for inaction.4.1              Rather than try to further argue the pros and cons of undertaking such processes, the need for proper scrutiny of changes to the road network is illustrated by the following case study. The purpose of this study is to highlight how easily the absence of informed auditing resulted in a hazardous scheme and additional cost to the community at large. It is only fair at this stage to point out to the Committee that the author of this paper was an objector to this scheme with the objections based on extensive professional experience of designing for cyclists at home and abroad.4.2              In 2011 a new road was opened close to the centre the county town of a shire county. This project was funded from government capital funds and developer contribution. During its gestation period objections were raised at the planning approval stage on the basis that elements of the scheme were unsafe for cyclists. At that time it was pointed out that the authority had not chosen best practice by not undertaking a cycle audit. The council rebutted this by claiming that its inclusion in the safety audit was an adequate approach. The objections were not taken on board at that time. Further objections were raised at the formal land acquisition stage and this resulted an inquiry determined through written representations. Again, the objections were not upheld. 4.3              The objections presented set out a number of safety concerns. It also pointed out that the needs of cyclists were not considered as part of the schemes development with no mention of their number and desire lines in the supporting traffic assessment. This was considered important by the objector since the town’s urban wards boasted over 9% journeys to work by bicycle in the 2001 Census. It was also known to impact upon existing cycle routes which linked to such destinations as a secondary school, a further education college and the town’s hospital, all of which are recognised as cycling destinations. In the absence of any analysis of their needs, any statement that the scheme in any way met them could not be considered as valid.4.4              For the benefit of any members of the Committee who are not regular cyclists the element of the scheme that gave rise to the greatest concern over cyclist safety surrounded the design of two cycle lanes. As designed and first built, cycle lanes were included that required cyclists to give way to any vehicle that crossed their path to turn left at a junction. Best practice contained in DfT guidance is to continue the lane to inform motorists that they may be crossing the path of cyclists going straight ahead; this was brought to the inspector’s attention.Good practice: cycle lane taking cyclists ahead - LTN 2/08 DfT4.5              As can be seen from the picture below, what was built was hazardous to cyclists as they could not be sure what other traffic was doing whereas, if built according to best practice, there would be no such confusion. In this picture the van is not indicating and it is impossible to determine its intentions (it went straight ahead) from its position leaving cyclists vulnerable to collisions with turning traffic4.6              Within ten days of opening, the authority realised the nature of the problem and put in place the solution below. &#xa0;Not a good practice solution but at least cyclists and motorist know what’s going on4.7              As mentioned above, there were two such examples, both of which were addressed within ten days of opening. Regular cyclists will understand just how dangerous the original design was and one has to assume that the changes made so soon after opening were the response of the authority to the evident danger posed by the original design. There still remain several cycle safety issues that still give rise to local cyclists concerns that have not been addressed but could have been resolved through a Cycle Audit without additional cost or delay.4.8              Since there was only one objector to the scheme it can be concluded that it was unnecessarily delayed as the result of the authority’s unwillingness to listen to the concerns of cyclists and revise its original designs. It is also the conclusion of the author that this situation would not have arisen had those involved in the design been properly trained and aware of the needs of cyclists. There were also unable to deliver changes to the road network that make life better for them in line with the authority’s claimed objectives of promoting cycling as a sustainable mode of transport. It should come as no surprise to the Committee that this authority has seen its levels of cycling to work fall by a third from a creditable 9.3% in 2001 to a disappointing 6.3% in 2011 (Census figures). It is the author’s opinion that the fact that the inspector also failed to identify the hazard created does not say much for his level of understanding.5.1              As mentioned in the author’s description he has experience of training planners, engineers and students across Europe. Clients have included the UK’s DfT, Ireland’s DOT, Universities and local authorities at home and abroad. The latter include recently successful bidders for the Cycle City Ambition Grant. This experience leads him to the conclusion that there is still a strong need and unsatisfied demand for training amongst professionals of all disciplines. In addition, the evidence of the case study above suggests that some authorities ‘don’t know what they don’t know’ and as a result feel no need to acknowledge their shortcomings or raise the level of their staff’s skills to meet best practice in ensuring the safety of cyclists.5.2              Probably the biggest barrier to training is the level of cutbacks in local authority revenue funding. Personal experience suggests that one area which falls victim in such circumstances is an authority’s training budget. In the recent past the author raised this issue with the then Minister for Transport, Mr Norman Baker. During their conversation Mr Baker expressed the view that it was “entirely compatible” with its objectives to use monies from the Local Sustainable Transport Fund to ensure that those delivering projects funded in this way are fully trained in best practice. He was, of course referring to the revenue element of the fund and also made the point that local authorities should be transparent in their activities. It is suggested that this principle could easily be extended to other projects, whether revenue or capital funded. This approach has been adopted by the Irish government which permits the costs of audits to be charged to the “applicable grant scheme” (Circular RLR 16/2008). Of course, such costs can also be spread across a number of schemes so the burden would not be disproportionately great for one project.5.3              The CIHT’s approach to Cycle Audit recognises that the process should be tailored to the scale and scope of each individual project. This means that the costs involved should not be prohibitive and hence, a reason for non-adoption. The important issue with all such audits is that the right questions are asked of the right (suitably trained) people at the right stage. This means that it should not, in itself, create a procedural or cost barrier to a scheme’s progress. Funding audits and training in the manner suggested would create a culture in which those auditing will share their (trained) understanding with other members of the planning and design teams and thereby achieve real value for money and a better informed workforce. &#xa0;January 2014&#xa0;Page 

[[[2]]] of 

[[[9]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;