&#xa0;Written evidence from Anna Powell (TWR0013)&#xa0;Dear Sirs – as requested I hereby recount my and my partner’s experiences with regards to Christmas Eve 2013 (24/12/13) / Flight Details: London Gatwick (North Terminal) to Belfast Intl, Dep 24 December 2013 08:30, Arr 24 December 2013 10:00, Flight 831&#xa0;My Partner Paul McKeown and woke up in good time to get to Gatwick Airport, and on checking the trains at 5 AM we noticed that there are no trains at all from Croydon to Gatwick due to apparent flooding.  Because of trains not working, we had to take a minicab at a cost.  We arrived at Gatwick around 6.00 AM and proceeded into the North Terminal accordingly to wait.  By 7.38 AM I tweeted my first tweet; “@Gatwick Airport horrendous queues, no information, where is customer service when you need it? Nonexistent. It being Xmas and all..” – by this time the terminal was already full of people, the information boards did not work and no one was able to move anywhere, apart from the people who were coming in through the doors and the atmosphere inside the terminal was getting increasingly claustrophobic. There were families with children, some disabled people with their carers, a lot of luggage and the whole floorspace was filled with people and their belongings. On occasion, a solitary Gatwick personnel would shout a destination and advice people to head to the South Terminal, where people were told they could check in their baggage and proceed on to their flights. It was very hard to hear what the solitary personnel were shouting as there were a huge amount of people and one person shouting across the terminal was very acoustically challenging. By midday everyone was hungry, toilets were blocked and flooding, no information was given; so you can easily understand how difficult it was overall to stand in a terminal, with no information about flights, no Easyjet or Gatwick Personnel in situ to update anxious people on what was actually going on – the tannoy system was not utilised for public announcements until much later, and no one knew what was going on; frustrating, upsetting, baffling.&#xa0;Eventually my partner and I went to get some lunch – there were no sandwiches left anywhere in the terminal and we had to have whatever they had, which was a packet of two mini pork pies, popcorn, crisps and some soft drinks (on this unhealthy food I felt sick) – plus, it was very difficult, as one could not go to the toilets.&#xa0;Further into the afternoon we were told to move to the South Terminal and we proceeded there with all of our luggage. We were directed into a very crowed area and waited patiently until we were checked in.  Once we had been checked in we went through security and onto airside in the South Terminal. We were waiting for a very long time and could not move as we had to keep an eye on the boards to see when our flight was actually going to take off.  Eventually we were advised to move to airside North Terminal, the wait was painful and people were crowding and shouting and it was difficult to understand overall where one was supposed to go and how.. luckily we are fairly young and still have our faculties about us, otherwise it would have been extremely challenging even at this stage.&#xa0;Back in North Terminal we were waiting and waiting. We dared to go and have a sandwich and a cup of tea at this stage even though again it was a pained process, through the knowledge that at any time they could announce our flight and we would not hear it, no announcement could be heard, we had to keep an eye on the flight boards at all times or feel anxious if we did not.  In North Terminal we were waiting for a good while and had now been at the terminal nearly 12 hours. There was a very heated and dangerous looking situating building whereby one Gatwick or Easyjet (not certain) personnel was trying to tell a frustrated huge crowd which flights were cancelled and for which we were still waiting information on.. 38 flights were cancelled to my recollection and our flight was still due to go.. we were so painfully looking forward to getting to hear good news that our flight was going to go as we have not seen family in Belfast for a year. People were crying, grown people were collapsing and screaming and crying from being so much under pressure for being at Gatwick airport for so long and then being told that the flights are not going and, basically YOUR Christmas, dear, is cancelled.. Atmosphere was getting aggressive and the Police was also required to be present to keep the peace with this frustrated, loud, now angry, crowd.  &#xa0;Finally, late, about 11.5 hours after our flight was going to take off, we were informed that our flight has been cancelled and we were directed to a staircase, to passport control, (even though we had never been anywhere but at Gatwick) and then when we started to be very worried about our luggage, we were told that we can claim the luggage back once we get out of passport control.. not so..&#xa0;Finally we managed to get out of passport control and back onto not airside-side of Gatwick, we went to the luggage area.. the luggage area was in darkness, there was clearly no power. Children were saying to the parents around us how scared they are of the dark area that they were forced to walk through. We were looking for something to happen for a while but as nothing moved, there was no staff AT ALL to ask about where the luggage was, we proceeded to go home. &#xa0;I was physically shaking, because I was so exhausted, dehydrated and undernourished.  I could not stop shaking for some time.  We had to pay 54 pounds to go home as all trains that would have been viable to us were not going.. so not only Gatwick airport and Easyjet failed us, but also the whole of London’s public transport failed us.. For the transport committee therefore this is not only an issue about Gatwick Airport – this is also an issue whereby all train traffic comes to a halt with a bit of bad weather. This, in my opinion is equally unacceptable as the lack of staff and the lack of information from start to finish at Gatwick Airport. &#xa0;We managed to secure the last chicken in the “long hours” Sainsbury on our own High Street for our Christmas dinner the next day, but our luggage was lost at Gatwick until the 28th with no information give which also gave us a huge amount of distress.. and no presents at Christmas! Eventually after tweeting to Gatwick, Gatwick DID return our luggage, with all of our presents in there which was nice.  However, we missed Christmas with our loved ones and this gave all of us a lot of upset feelings and sadness. As far as we were concerned our Christmas was cancelled.&#xa0;January 2014&#xa0;