&#xa0;Supplementary written evidence from ATOC (TWR0014)&#xa0;Dear Mrs Ellman&#xa0;Thank you for inviting me to give evidence to the Transport Select Committee on the rail industry's preparations and performance during the recent bad weather. This was an important opportunity for me to explain the actions taken by the industry to minimise disruption to passengers and ensure that they reached their destinations over the Christmas period.&#xa0;During the evidence session I undertook to write to you to answer some specific points relating to Southeastern's services. Your first query related to the provision of replacement buses. Having spoken to my colleagues at Southeastern, they have assured me that they went to every effort to arrange a replacement bus service on 27 December for commuters in Hastings.&#xa0;The rail line was initially closed on 23 December. It had been anticipated that the line would be able to reopen on 27 December avoiding the need for a replacement bus service. Gale force winds on the evening of 26December meant that it would not have been safe to open the rail line on the morning of 27 December- at which stage Southeastern initiated the process of sourcing replacement buses. After contacting local bus companies, Southeastern were unable to secure replacement buses as the road conditions in the area were also treacherous and the bus companies were unable to provide additional capacity for rail replacement services inthese circumstances.&#xa0;You also asked if Southeastern has ongoing arrangements in place with local bus companies to provide replacement bus services should their train services be unable to run. As is the case with all train companies, Southeastern do have agreements in place with local bus companies and well established links with Transport for London. In rural areas securing additional services can be more difficult as bus companies tend to be smaller and are often committed to both scheduled and local school services during the morning rush hour, which means they are unavailable during the period of highest demand for rail replacement services.&#xa0;Your final concern was that passengers were being informed online that the line between Ashford and St Pancras International stations was open, when in fact no trains were running. As I alluded to in my evidence, the situation faced by all TOCs was a constantly moving picture.&#xa0;It had been anticipated that Southeastern services would be able to run on 27 December. Gales on the evening of December 26 meant that this had to be reviewed and the lines had to be reproofed. The Southeastern and National Rail Enquiries websites were updated to show that services would not run before 12.00. As it turned out Southeastern were a·ble to run some services on some lines before 1200 but not on others. This included the line between Ashford and London St Pancras, due to the severity of the line side damage and the number of fallen trees it was not possible run any trains until mid afternoon. Southeastern has received some feedback from stakeholders and customers regarding the clarity of communication around this and are working to ensure that similar confusion does not arise again.&#xa0;I hope that this information clarifies some of the issues raised during the session on 7 January. If you require anyfurther information, please don't hesitate to get in touch.&#xa0;Chris BurchellChairman, National Task ForceJanuary 2014&#xa0;&#xa0;