

[[[FBA0008/13-14]]]&#xa0;&#xa0;i              Grant Thornton UK LLP (Grant Thornton) acknowledges that the FBSC is currently conducting an inquiry into the draft Finance Bill 2014 and, in particular, on the rules for taxing partnerships. We have considered the provisions within the draft Finance Bill 2014 and are pleased to take the opportunity to respond to the call for evidence, with a view to supporting the FBSC's report.&#xa0;ii              Please note, the document focuses primarily on the draft partnership measures. The second area of questioning, regarding the general approach to tax policy making, has been considered in the context of the partnership measures, and the consultation process endured to this point, as a specific example of how the 'new approach' is working.&#xa0;1.1              Our general comments on the proposed changes to the taxation of partnerships can be found in the response we submitted to the original consultation which was published on 20 May 2013. A copy of the response is available on our website:http://www.grant-thornton.co.uk/Global/Images/Partnership%20condoc%20GT%20response.pdf 1.2              Broadly, there are significant concerns over the measures, as set out in our response document, and voiced in a meeting with HM Revenue &amp; Customs (HMRC) as part of the consultation process. Further, the draft legislation that now forms part of the Finance Bill not only fails to address these concerns, but has in fact created a number of new questions, not least over the subjective nature of what has been proposed. These concerns are set out, in general terms, below. Please note that we also intend to separately respond to the technical consultation on the draft clauses to the Finance Bill 2014, and so will reserve comments on the specifics of the legislation for our Finance Bill representations.1.3              In brief, it is felt that the draft legislation is not wholly appropriate because, fundamentally, it fails to achieve the stated objectives for the following reasons:&#xa0;1.4              A number of these issues have arisen as a direct result of the apparent flaws in the consultation process.2.1.1              The subjective nature of the draft legislation is a cause for concern. This will unavoidably create uncertainty in the legislation and cannot, therefore, be considered an effective, nor indeed appropriate approach to creating the law. &#xa0;In particular, based on the draft legislation, there is real uncertainty and confusion over certain terms and definitions included in the legislation, such as how to define whether a member has 'significant influence' over a partnership's business function. 2.1.2              Some further examples of subjectivity within the 'salaried member' provisions that are likely to give rise to confusion are:&#xa0;2.1.3              The changes are intended to ensure that partnerships, and their members, are taxed as the Government intended. This will be difficult to achieve, however, as the lack of certainty over the application of the new rules will arguably undermine the effectiveness of what has been proposed. 2.2.1              A number of practical questions were raised during the consultation process. It is noted that several of these comments have been considered in the draft legislation. Nevertheless, question marks remain over significant aspects of the new legislation including, for example, over the practicalities of moving a 'salaried member' from being taxed on the current year basis, to the payroll. In fact, it would appear that little or no thought has been given to the impact of the individual members' cessation/overlap rules thus far. 2.2.2              There is also uncertainty, based on the draft legislation, as to whether actions taken by Limited Liability Partnerships (LLPs) to ensure that members are not treated as salaried members – say, an increase in capital contributions to satisfy condition C – will be disregarded under anti-avoidance provisions, even where the member’s risk increases as a result.  2.2.3              Furthermore, the fact remains that affected businesses have only a matter of weeks to implement any necessary changes such as the introduction, in some cases, of a new payroll system for 'salaried members'. With only 10 weeks before the proposed commencement date, there is still very little guidance available on the transitional rules in particular, making the transition an unnecessarily confusing, and complicated task. It should be noted that, far from being simply a case of someone's tax status altering, the potential changes go to the heart of the culture of the business, and how an individual's status in their field is conveyed. No business should be forced to rush such a cultural change with key personnel simply to speed up the implementation of new tax guidelines. Such forced change is not beneficial for either the individual impacted, or the firm's prospect of continuing to generate profit and therefore contribute taxes.2.2.4              This situation is clearly not ideal, and is of course further complicated by the fact that businesses will be expected to apply the rules before the finalisation of the legislation, based on the fact that Finance Bill 2014 is unlikely to be published until the end of March 2014 before receiving Royal Assent sometime later in the summer (in line with previous years). &#xa0;2.2.5              If, as is likely to be the case in the limited time available, many firms look to obtain additional amounts of capital from those current partners who do not meet the criteria as laid out, this will require significant bank funding to the sector. It is evident from discussions with the main banks active in the sector that whilst they are willing to fund healthy businesses, they are being asked to:&#xa0;2.2.6              This, at a time when the financial health of the sector is under significant strain and causing the banks significant concerns due to recent (and on-going) examples of failures where the banks have been hit hard. &#xa0;2.2.7              We do not believe that the timescale as set out in the legislation allows the banks time to undertake due process in reviewing these applications for additional capital loans and believe that as a result, the banks will have to either:&#xa0;Neither of the above is a desirable outcome for the UK economy.&#xa0;2.2.8              This would appear to be an inherent flaw in the current policy, and will only serve to create further uncertainty. &#xa0;3.1.1              The 'tax information and impact notes' that accompanied the draft legislation commented that the measures will have a "negligible impact on businesses".&#xa0;However, having to deal with complex, subjective legislation is a drain on businesses’ time and resources. By way of an example, 'salaried members' will not have the same employment rights as individuals with contracts of service, as the proposed rules are stated to apply for the purposes of the Income Tax Acts. Businesses may find that individuals are unwilling to become members in case they are treated as employees for the purposes of tax and National Insurance contributions (NIC), but without the employment protection that normally comes with the additional tax and NIC liabilities that accompany employment. This could impact on succession and limit an LLP’s ability to raise capital.  &#xa0;3.1.2              The types of uncertainties referred to above will be a distraction also. It is expected, therefore, that the full extent of the draft legislation will indeed have a detrimental effect on UK business, and would question how it has been concluded that this is not the case. &#xa0;3.1.3              It may also be noted that the potential impact of the measures is more wide ranging than even HMRC previously envisaged. This was clearly evidenced by the fact that the expected yield from the measures increased significantly from the original estimate. 3.2.1              The original consultation document set out the Government's belief that the existing rules surrounding the taxation of members of a Limited Liability Partnership (LLP), are effectively open to abuse. It is stated that this produces "unfairness in the tax system". &#xa0;3.2.2              Indeed, achieving 'fairness' was a recurring theme throughout the proposals, and understood to be fundamental to the introduction of the new measures. However, it is generally felt that the wide ranging effect of the draft legislation is, in fact, somewhat heavy handed and disproportionate. Furthermore, it is likely that the measures will, in fact, put partnerships at a disadvantage when compared to other business vehicles available, such as a company, for example.  &#xa0;3.2.3               Other examples of where the draft legislation (in respect of the new salaried member status) will give rise to potential 'unfair' outcomes include &#xa0;It is questionable, therefore, whether the proposed legislation can be said to achieve the objective of 'preserving fairness'.&#xa0;3.3.1              The introduction of complicated new legislation (and some 55 pages of guidance) also sends out a mixed message with regards to the coinciding agenda to simplify the UK tax administration. As stated above, the new legislation will create additional uncertainty and add another layer of complexity for businesses to have to deal with.3.3.2              As stated in our response to the original consultation, a much simpler solution existed in that it would be possible for HMRC to challenge the status of members simply by removing any perceived presumption of self-employment and using existing case law. However, the intention is to remove that perceived presumption and then introduce new legislation that is unsatisfactory (examples as to why being set out above). 3.3.3              This point comes into sharp focus when one considers that HMRC will have to continue to use existing case law when looking at LLPs formed outside the UK and traditional partnerships.  3.3.4              Ironically, and not strictly a tax point, for the purposes of pension auto-enrolment, the test to determine who is within the ambit of the rules is whether the individual is either an employee or a worker. As stated above, salaried members of LLPs will not be employees for all purposes and will not satisfy the employment test. It is understood that the tests, as recommended by the pensions regulator, as to whether an individual is a worker are the existing employed/self-employed tests. 3.3.5              Furthermore, as these are essentially anti-avoidance measures, questions may be raised as to whether the GAAR could/should instead be applied to counteract the respective tax advantages that the draft legislation is intended to counteract. &#xa0;While it is suggested in the consultation document (at paragraph 3.55) that the use of profit and loss allocations, in particular, may be outside the scope of these rules, it is understood that any uncertainty could be removed by the provision of specific guidance on the point in question.

[[[&#xa0;]]]4.1              HMRC's Tax Consultation Framework, sets out the five stages to tax policy development:&#xa0;Stage 1               Setting out objectives and identifying options.Stage 2               Determining the best option and developing a framework for implementation including detailed policy design.Stage 3               Drafting legislation to effect the proposed change.Stage 4               Implementing and monitoring the change.Stage 5               Reviewing and evaluating the change.&#xa0;4.2              Referring specifically to the original consultation document, it was set out that "while there are some aspects of detailed policy design that are still open, this consultation is at stage 3 and is about ways to achieve the objectives stated in the consultation document while ensuring that the proposals do not have unexpected impacts."&#xa0;4.3              Firstly, only inviting comments from professional advisors (and other stakeholders) at this late stage will (evidently) give rise to practical issues. Unfortunately, it would now appear that the introduction of the new rules will be rushed into place, without proper consideration. This should not be the case when introducing new law. This approach will inevitably give rise to ineffective legislation, to the detriment of both the businesses affected, and to the integrity of, and general confidence in, the UK tax administration.&#xa0;4.4              Furthermore, it simply cannot be said that the consultation period has sufficiently dealt with a number of the 'unexpected impacts' that have arisen. As stated above, question marks remain over the practical implications of the introduction of the new rules in particular, while the significant uprating of the expected revenue yield (as identified in the Autumn Statement 2013 documentation) is clear evidence that HMRC had failed to fully appreciate the implications of what had been proposed. &#xa0;4.5              However, in this case, it would appear that HMRC has chosen to ignore the evident failings in its approach. Indeed, rather than accept that the under estimate was as a result of any apparent flaws in the proposals, and seek to correct the position, as might otherwise be expected during an on-going consultation process, there would seem to be something of a congratulatory tone to the announcement regarding the additional £1.9 billion in revenue it now expects to recover. &#xa0;5.1              In summary, the subjective nature of what has been proposed puts serious doubt over whether the legislation, as drafted, will operate as intended. Indeed, the significant uncertainty arising as a result of the proposed new rules could effectively act to undermine the Government's overall objective of ensuring a balanced, and competitive tax system. 5.2              As such, it is strongly recommended that the Government reconsider the proposals and, at the very least, consider delaying the introduction of the new rules to allow for a further period of consultation and analysis of all possible impacts.January 2014

[[[1]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]