&#xa0;1. The Federation of Small Businesses (FSB) welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Economic Affairs Finance Bill Sub-Committee inquiry on the draft Finance Bill 2014.&#xa0;2. The FSB is the UK’s leading business organisation. It exists to protect and promote the interests of the self-employed and all those who run their own business. The FSB is non-party political, and with around 200,000 members, it is also the largest organisation representing small and medium-sized businesses in the UK.  &#xa0;3. Our response focuses on your request for evidence on the Government’s new approach to Tax Policy Making, and in particular I would like to draw your attention to the Tax Impact Assessment process. The FSB published a report in 2012 which considered the work of the Regulatory Policy Committee (RPC) and regulatory reform. The FSB supports the work of the RPC as we believe that it ensures that there is transparency and independent scrutiny within regulatory development. &#xa0;4. There is an argument that tax compliance is very different to regulation and therefore tax needs to be kept outside of the RPC process. This is an argument that the FSB disagrees with. For business, tax administration is a compliance burden in the same way as regulation and our surveys show that in fact tax compliance ranks above regulation in terms of compliance burdens. While tax decisions themselves should be kept outside of the RPC process – the level and type of tax – we believe that any decision relating to tax administration and the process of collecting tax should be subject to external scrutiny. We also understand that there will be instances where exemptions to this rule might be necessary. &#xa0;5. While the FSB recognises the important role that the Administrative Burden Advisory Board plays in investigating specific issues, and undertaking inquiries it does not undertake an independent, external scrutiny process of all tax impact assessments, in the way the RPC could. This is a specific process which requires a systematic approach to all impact assessments and results in a formal opinion on the quality of the impact assessment which is accessible to all.&#xa0;6. There are two key changes that could be made. Firstly, all tax impact assessments should be subjected to independent scrutiny at both consultation and final stage by a body external to HMRC – as is the case for all other Government departments. We believe that this should be done by the RPC. They would have the expertise to be able to fully scrutinise the impact assessment and understand how businesses will implement the change. The opinion of this body should be made public at the end of the process. &#xa0;7. Secondly we suggest that there are aspects of a regulatory impact assessment that could be included in all tax impact assessment in a more significant way. These sections are: &#xa0;&#xa0;8. Many of these aspects will be included in the consultation document but not in the tax impact assessment. We believe that this information could ensure that all tax policy changes are fully thought through and scrutinised. In the long-term these suggested changes could mean that reviews such as that which the Office of Tax simplification (OTS) has undertaken would not be necessary. Getting tax policy right from the outset is the next step.&#xa0;9. Finally the FSB would like Government to consider bringing tax administration into scope of the Regulatory budget system ‘One-in Two-out’. Businesses regard tax administration as an area of ‘red tape’.  To deliver tangible reductions to the compliance burdens that businesses face, and to encourage simplification of the tax system that we all desire, Government should introduce discipline to the development of tax systems by subjecting changes to a tight budget. &#xa0;I hope that these comments are helpful. &#xa0;January 20142&#xa0;