FBA0018/13-14

[[[Deloitte—Written evidence]]]We welcome the opportunity to provide evidence to the Finance Bill Sub-Committee’s enquiry into the draft Finance Bill 2014, and set out below our key comments under the various headings. 

[[[Taxation of partnerships]]]1.1.&#xa0; Deloitte advises a significant number of professional partnerships and in particular many of the world’s leading law firms. The majority of such firms are now constituted as LLPs, following the introduction of the Limited Liability Partnership Act in 2000, which encouraged this as a business structure for these and other businesses formerly operating as General Partnerships. We have actively engaged with the consultation process, having responded to the Consultation Document and had various meetings with the HMRC team responsible. 2.1.&#xa0; The main policy objectives of the changes proposed in the Finance Bill 2014 have expanded since the initial consultation and now are:Whilst we support these objectives, in our view the legislation that has been proposed does not meet them. Furthermore, our main concern is that the disguised remuneration proposals go far beyond the stated objective of tacking those seeking to manipulate the tax rules and, instead, alter the tax treatment of partnership in the UK.  As such virtually all professional practices in the UK are affected by these proposals.  It is doubtful that this was ever the intention or the policy objective. &#xa0;3.1.&#xa0; The difference in tax treatment between LLPs and general partnerships (GPs) arises from the specific tax legislation which was introduced when LLPs became available in 2000.  That legislation states that (providing the LLP is carrying on a trade, profession or vocation with a view to profit) “all the activities of the LLP are treated as carried on in partnership by its members”.  This is interpreted by HMRC to mean that all the members are to be treated as self-employed, irrespective of the commercial substance of their status and whether or not they would have been so under the well-established rules applying to partners in GPs. 3.2.&#xa0; In our view the need for these proposals in Finance Bill 2014 are as a result of the ill-considered legislation introduced in 2000.  If the rules relating to GPs had been directly applied to LLPs at this time, the playing field between the two types of business structure would always have been level and the door would never have been opened to those who might be tempted to use the rule solely to reduce tax. 3.3.&#xa0; If the policy objective is to level the playing field between UK LLPs and other partnerships (such as GPs and US LLPs) then the simplest solution would be to amend the original deficient legislation to remove the presumption that members are to be taxed as partners.  This would allow the law to revert back to the previous position namely that an individual’s status as partner or employee should be assessed by reference to the case law tests. 3.4.&#xa0; However, it seems that HMRC, rather than apply similar rules across both LLPs and GPs, is now introducing complex rules to counter perceived avoidance in this area. At the heart of the problem is a failure to appreciate that the difference between a partner and an employee cannot be defined by a formula.  Rather, it is a question of the qualitative balance of factors, which is why the UK case law which has evolved over the centuries constructs the test in this manner.  The challenge with a formula is that it is likely to mean many partnerships not engaged in avoidance need to alter some of their terms of partnership and additionally that those intent on manipulation will simply have bright lines to satisfy.  Further, the approach chosen is different to the qualitative factors which apply to partners in GPs and overseas LLPs, thus continuing the perceived distortions.3.5.&#xa0; Under the new proposals, a member will be treated as employed if all of the following characteristics are met:3.8              Many professional partnerships will find that their members fall within these rules despite the fact that there was no tax avoidance motive in their appointment as members. 3.9              The new proposals will mean that, irrespective of the motive in making individuals LLP members rather than employees, all LLPs will need to consider their internal structure and assess whether the new proposals will apply to them.  For many it means, in practice, adjusting either their partner remuneration and appraisal systems or their capital structures before 6 April 2014 so as to fit within these new defined parameters.  We believe that many partnerships may wish to increase capital to meet the 25% parameter mentioned above.  3.11              Perhaps the Sub-Committee will be seeking the views of the banks on this change – as most partnerships arrange borrowings for partners to finance capital contributions to partnerships.  Although it is common for borrowing to be arranged centrally, the debt remains personal debt of the individual partners and not a partnership liability.  Our understanding from informal discussions is that, while banks will aim to be as helpful as possible to businesses, the shift required from lending to the firm towards lending to individual partners (so as to increase their capital exposure within their firms) is not necessarily welcome given the higher amounts of regulatory capital required to support lending to individuals than lending to business.  We anticipate that many partners of smaller firms will struggle to raise the required lending within this timetable. 4.1.&#xa0; The consultation was first announced in Budget 2013 with the new rules proposed to take effect from 6 April 2014.  This was an ambitious time scale. The consultation team were very active in meeting both industry specialists and those potentially affected.  However, the process may have been easier if industry specialists had been more closely involved from the start, or even included in the team. Numerous specialists are available within HMRC who could have assisted in this regard.4.2.&#xa0; The consultation process which took place in the summer sought responses on the basis of a much less far-reaching set of proposals than those ultimately then published on 10 December.  Had businesses known the true parameters many more would have responded and those that did respond would have responded differently.4.3.&#xa0; We query whether a full impact assessment has been undertaken given the late change from proposals designed to address tax-avoidance to proposals with more fundamental impact across the professions.  Careful impact assessment is important because the cash flow impact of these changes on small to medium-sized professional practices could cause the financial difficulties for some businesses coming as it does at a time of hardship for many, and without adequate time to arrange alternative sources of funding. 5.1.&#xa0; The proposals released on 10 December 2013 to apply from 6 April 2014 were radically different from the original proposals. This leaves a very short time for the many LLPs who are affected by the new proposals (despite operating entirely legitimately), to re-organise their affairs within permissible parameters, as outlined in 3.5 above. Such a re-organisation is a time-intensive leadership chore with a very tight timeframe given the necessary partner consultation periods and discussions with firm’s bankers. Some partnerships will need to amend their partnership documents, which certainly requires consultation within the partnership and is not a simple or quick process. 5.2.&#xa0; The task is particularly difficult as there are still a number of uncertainties around the new rules, and their intended application to many common partnership scenarios is not yet clear, despite the guidance issued in December. Further guidance is expected to be published in February which may assist in dealing with these uncertainties.5.3.&#xa0; It may have been more appropriate for the changes to have been deferred to allow for a more detailed consultation on the operation of these new rules, which were effectively first announced on 10 December 2013.5.4.&#xa0; Furthermore an implementation date of 6 April brings many additional complexities to the process.  It would be far more sensible to implement the changes at the start of the partnership accounting period, which for many professional partnerships is 1 May or 1 June, rather than to have the complication of treating members as both partners and employees in the same accounting period.  This was drawn to HMRC’s attention during the consultation process and it is unfortunate that it was not taken into account in designing the proposals as it does not seem likely that any significant loss of revenue would be involved by aligning the changes to accounting periods rather than tax years. 6.1.&#xa0; As mentioned above, we fully accept the policy objective of preventing unfairness and market distortion by ensuring that inappropriate partnership allocations to a company or similar vehicle cannot create tax advantages. However, as in the disguised remuneration provisions above, the proposals are very wide, and are likely to affect many common structures, as well as the tax-motivated structures for which they were designed.  6.2.&#xa0; In particular, they run counter to a number of other current legislative and regulatory initiatives, including the liberalisation of the practice of law through Alternative Business Structures.   These structures facilitate non-lawyer external investment into the legal profession.  The most common structure is for the law firm to continue as a partnership but for external ownership to be admitted via a company which becomes a controlling member of the law firm.  This creates a “mixed partnership” which, at first blush is caught by these punitive new rules.   This is particularly unfortunate as the law is one of the UK’s most successful international exports and the liberalisation of the profession was a positive opportunity for the UK to again take the lead, internationally, in the evolution of legal services.  This tax change takes away with one hand the important commercial opportunity offered by Government with the other hand.6.3.&#xa0; Whether or not a business is caught by the rules is not determined by a test of commercial motivation; instead it is to be assessed by a test of whether or not it is “reasonable to suppose” that the company’s share of profits from the partnership is attributable to the individual partner’s “power to enjoy” it.  We can see how this test works to capture inappropriate tax-motivated structures but our concern is that it leaves some genuine, commercial structures and practices in a position of great uncertainty given the highly subjective nature of the test and the lack of any useful guidance as to how it is to be interpreted and applied by HMRC in practice.  There would have been ways of tackling the policy objective without such unfortunate adverse side effects on business.&#xa0;

[[[Tax]]]

[[[ Policy Making]]]We very much welcomed the coalition Government’s June 2010 document on Tax Policy Making.  The key improvements we saw are the extended timeframe for introducing new legislation, with consultation at multiple stages; the focus on re-considering the legal framework for some areas rather than trying to ‘patch’ holes in the legalisation; and the increased evidence about the policy change and those potentially affected.   There have been some clear successes from the new approach.  The basic notion of announcing an outline area in a Budget, producing a consultation document in, say, June and engaging in discussion before preparing draft legislation for consultation from early December and enactment by the following July should give the time needed for proper consideration of the measures proposed.   Examples of successes include the new controlled foreign company rules (started by the previous government) and the statutory residence test.  We also commend the withdrawal of proposals when consultation reveals that they are unlikely to achieve the intended effect.  Examples of areas where the Policy Making framework has not been applied fully include the SDLT and Annual tax on Enveloped Dwellings changes implemented in 2012 and 2013 and the partnerships consultation discussed above.  In these cases, the objectives of the policy were not set out fully at the start and undoubtedly changed significantly during the course of the policy development.  That doesn’t help effective development of a policy and its translation into legislation.  The cap on income tax reliefs is another example of poor policy making, which the committee considered last year.  We still cannot understand the economic rationale for limiting some loss reliefs in respect of losses arising from the business in which the taxpayer is mainly engaged, but not limiting (or having a much higher limit) for some investment losses.  We do fully accept the possible need to put a cap on certain reliefs for cost reasons, though.  We would also highlight policy changes in relation to the oil and gas sector as examples where quite significant economic changes have been announced with insufficient consideration of the overall impact.  The announcement of the increased rate of supplementary corporation tax has previously been highlighted; the Autumn Statement 2103 contained another change in relation to drilling rigs without enough discussion with the industry on the case for change and the best means of achieving that change.  Naturally the responsibility for policy choices will always rest with the elected government of the day but we should all want those choices to be made with as much information as possible.  The final area to encourage is post-implementation review.  We have not yet seen a good example of this being carried out.January 2014