&#xa0;

[[[Written evidence submitted b]]]

[[[y The North Sea Marine Cluster]]]The North Sea Marine Cluster (NSMC) was created in 2009 and comprises the University of East Anglia, the Gardline Group, Marsh and Norfolk County Council.  It brings together business, scientific, academic and public sector experience for the benefit of the regional economy. The Cluster has long had an interest in seeing marine protected areas properly managed and adequately funded.  It first commissioned self-funded research four years ago which examined the lessons that could be drawn from experience elsewhere in Europe and internationally.  The cluster sponsored a conference on the subject and has followed this up with a case study looking at the British Indian Ocean Territory MPA and a seminar on the future funding of marine conservation. We, therefore, welcome the Committee’s enquiry.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Summary of main points]]]

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[The Plans for implementing the 27 so far approved MCZs]]]The announcement in November last year of the 27 new MCZs represented pleasing progress in the development of a network of MPAs in English and UK waters.  The documentation that accompanied the announcement was clear and accessible. However, whilst it touched on the management measures and who might be affected it was very light on detail.  The success of the MCZs in delivering their objectives will rest on the effectiveness of the management measures and the scientific monitoring undertaken to ensure that the designated features, habitats and species are being adequately protected.  The present lack of management information leaves businesses with uncertainty which could affect investment choices, livelihoods and jobs.  It could also give cause to environmental risks.  Within the zones themselves these are likely to be mitigated by the controls exercised through the various marine licensing and consenting regimes, though without a management plan such controls would remain ad hoc and case by case.  We have less confidence that there are yet the means in place to understand and assess the risks arising from displacement, for example from fishing vessels.  These might not be just confined to creating new pressures on the marine environment.  Navigational and crew safety and increased CO2 emissions may also be factors.   The problems of displacement are recognised in the UK Marine Policy Statement which states that regard should be had to “the impacts of displacement and whether it is possible for vessels to relocate to other fishing grounds.” It is explained that the marine plan authorities (e.g. the MMO, IFCAs, the statutory nature conservation bodies (SNCBs), port and harbour authorities) should also consider the potential impacts of this displacement on the viability of fish stocks and on the marine landscape in the alternative fishing grounds.  But, how these requirements are supposed to be applied in practice remains unclear (we return to this subject below). 

[[[How those MCZs will be monitored, managed and enforced, and the needs of different stakeholders – including fishing, leisure and extractive industries – will be balanced against environmental protection]]]We believe that management plans should be prepared quickly for each of the 27 newly declared MCZs to ensure that the protections employed are part of a coherent and integrated strategy and do not rely solely upon ad hoc decision making processes.  The plans should recognise the MCZ’s contribution to the UK’s network of MPAs, and should reflect an understanding of the social and economic factors that are likely to influence how stakeholders will respond and support the management of the MCZs. The management plans should set out:The plans should form part of a wider published MPA implementation strategy to enable synergies and efficiencies to be secured.  To avoid the best becoming the enemy of the good, the management plans should be kept simple, concise and clear.  A firm timescale should be put on the production of the plans. By engaging all interested parties – or at least affording them the opportunity – it should be possible to ensure, as far as possible, that the objectives of the sites can be achieved at minimum disruption and cost to business and leisure users.  However, some displacement of users (e.g. fishing vessels) and additional cost to individuals is inevitable.  There will be winners and losers. One of the present difficulties for both the responsible authorities and external stakeholders is the web of different responsibilities. Whilst management plans should reflect local expertise and need, there should be a single entity responsible for drawing these threads together and co-ordinating preparation and implementation of each MCZ management plan.  We believe that the most appropriate body is the Marine Management Organisation (MMO).  This role would sit comfortably and link logically with the MMO’s responsibilities for preparing and implementing marine plans and its broad range of marine powers and consenting functions. It would also help strengthen the integration of marine conservation management action with implementation of marine planning.  The co-ordination function could be undertaken without usurping or undermining the statutory responsibilities of the other bodies. Defra has stated that management of sites is currently being prioritised nationally according to the potential or actual adverse impacts of activities on the features designated in relation to fishing activities. This prioritisation will be further refined at a local level taking into account relevant information and will guide regulators to those sites which may need protection before others.  It would be helpful to have a timescale for these actions and to know whether it is the intention to apply a similar approach in respect of other potentially damaging activities.  If so, again those likely to be affected will need to be informed and consulted, in the interests of good regulation and to ensure that the MCZs are protected.  Our preference would be to see these exercises incorporated into individual management plans.  The Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 requires the Secretary of State to report to Parliament every 6 years the progress on achieving the objectives of the network of MPAs in the UK marine area, including MCZs.  The first report was submitted in December last year.  We suggest that 2018 is too long to wait to learn whether MPAs including MCZs are being well managed.  There should be an interim reporting mechanism for management functions.   We suggest that for at least the first few years this should be done annually and that the MMO is well placed to undertake this task. In the interests of transparency we suggest that implementation of the management plans should be subject to independent review very three years.  

[[[The Plans to improve the evidence base for considering potential further zones, including the priorities and funding of the research bodies that will undertake the necessary research. ]]]To avoid the difficulties experienced previously, Defra along with the Statutory Nature Conservation Bodies and all other organisations involved in collecting, collating, analysing an assessing the evidence should establish a collective and shared understanding from the outset about the scope and quality of the evidence that will be required for the future tranches of MCZs.  The process should be open and transparent to avoid misunderstandings and enable external input.  This is particularly important given the wide level of interest in the subject. In written evidence submitted to the Science and Technology Committee in 2012, the NSMC suggested that the Government’s Marine Science Co-ordination Committee (MSCC) could usefully play a more prominent role in helping to assemble evidence for the designation and future management of marine protected areas.  We remain of that view. The Committee’s 2013 progress report indicated that it was involved in providing advice on the interactions between fishing activity and proposed Marine Conservation Zones and European Marine Sites, and was working on sea bed mapping to support policies such as designation of marine conservation zones and marine planning.  The MSCC, supported by the UK Marine Monitoring and Assessment Strategy, could extend its areas of interest relevant to MCZs.  It might also be in a position to help ensure that the overlaps between the evidence needs of MPAs, including MCZs, marine planning and the Marine Strategy Framework Directive can be addressed and that priority is given to resourcing the research and monitoring required for MCZs and other areas of complementary work out of the total annual budget of £170m that falls within the purview of the Committee. A report last year, sponsored jointly by Defra, BIS and the Society of Marine Industries under the auspices of the MSCC, looked at private and public sector marine science and evidence needs. Some of the findings and recommendations are relevant to the Environment Audit Committee’s Inquiry and the question of resources.  For example:Among the recommendations were: The Cluster sees merit in these conclusions.  They offer the prospect of optimising benefits from the public and private sectors working together, and achieving cost reductions and efficiencies in obtaining the improved evidence needed for further MCZ as well as enabling existing MPAs to be properly monitored, assessed and managed.  There is a fundamental problem when seeking to identify MCZs, introduce marine planning, and meet the requirements of the Marine Strategy Framework Directive.  The problem is that knowledge of our marine habitats is sparse.  High-quality habitat maps from surveys are only available for less than ten percent of the UK seabed.  For the rest, it is largely a matter of relying on broad-scale predictive maps of seabed habitats.  As a result, when the MCZ process was underway it was sometimes found that features thought to be in one place were in another or did not exist at all. On other occasions, features were found that were not known about.  This problem is likely to cause major difficulties as marine planning and plan-led consenting and licensing process are introduced.  This was looked at by CEFAS in 2010.  They concluded in a report to Defra that “the seabed habitat data currently available is too sparse, patchy and variable in quality to make sound decisions in relation to key planning and management processes”.  They also reported that the Marine and Coastguard Agency had estimated the cost of surveying all areas not previously surveyed would be £210m and that there was the capacity in the commercial survey market to do this.  It was thought that the resultant economic benefits would be several multiples of the cost.  As far as we are aware no action has been taken on this.  By contrast the Irish Government decided to embark on a seabed mapping exercise in 1999 and have continued the programme in the teeth of dire economic circumstances, because of the anticipated environmental and economic benefits.  We believe that the UK Government should revisit the question of mapping the seabed around the English coast. Funding is always going to be a difficult issue; not just the funding of the research to provide the evidence for designation of MCZ, but also the funds needed to ensure that sites are adequately protected and managed.  Much of the latter burden will fall on IFCAs in relation to commercial fishing activity.  We would be concerned if their budgets proved to be inadequate.  Equally, if the MCZs and other MPAs are to achieve their purpose it will be important that the necessary funds are found to avoid them becoming little more than just lines on a map.  Preparing proposals for further MCZs should go hand in hand with identifying how the costs of subsequent management and scientific monitoring will be met. Above all, there should be clarity about relative priorities and resources should be well directed and well managed. 

[[[What the balance of factors should be – social and economic factors, as well as environmental factors – in considering further potential MCZs]]]The central purpose of MCZs and their contribution to the wider objective of creating a UK network of MPAs should be the prime consideration.  But, social and economic considerations will need to be taken into account.  This has to be in the context of meeting the requirements of marine planning which has broader goals.  The Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 requires all public authorities taking authorisation or enforcement decisions that affect or might affect the UK marine area to do so in accordance with the Marine Policy Statement (MPS), and Marine Plans where they exist, unless relevant considerations indicate otherwise.  Public authorities taking decisions that affect or might affect the UK marine area which are not authorisation or enforcement decisions, for example decisions about what representations they should make as a consultee or about what action they should carry out themselves, must have regard to the MPS and relevant Marine Plans.  These statutory obligations apply, for example, to the formulation of advice by the SNCBs, consideration of MCZ proposals by Defra, the declaration of MCZs and the management and enforcement of MCZs and other MPAs.The Marine Policy Statement (MPS), published in 2011, sets out the social, environmental and environmental considerations that have to be taken into account.  Further spatial detail will be set out in the Marine Plans – the draft east inshore and east offshore marine plans have already been published and even in draft form they are a “relevant consideration”.  Taken together, therefore, the Marine Policy Statement and the marine plans provide the statutory framework within which social, economic and environmental factors have to be balanced when considering further potential MCZs.  The Marine Policy Statement and the draft marine plans are considerably stronger on consideration of social and economic factors than the requirements set out in section 117(7) of the Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 when designating MCZs.  The MMO has yet to publish guidance on implementation and interpretation of the MPS and forthcoming marine plans, so it is difficult to judge the practical implications and how the balance of social, economic and environmental factors is to be struck when considering further MCZs.  We suggest that the Committee might want to explore the relationship between the MPS, marine plans and the further work on identifying and declaring MCZs.  We believe that marine planning is an important and needed instrument for managing competing uses for our seas and providing the means to secure sustainable development whilst protecting the marine environment.  To achieve this, the implementation and management of marine planning should be in sync with further work on MCZs and other types of MPA. Ideally we would like to see the MMO and the SNCBs working together to produce concise and clear operational guidelines on this relationship as soon as possible, for the benefit of all marine users. We are pleased that Ministers have recognised the need to bring management of proposed MCZs into the equation at a much earlier stage of the process.  Unless there is an understanding of how the management measures will affect businesses and other users it is not possible to assess the social and economic effects.  Indeed, it would seem difficult to comply with the requirements of the MPS unless the management implications are part of the early considerations. 

[[[The level of ambition in the programme to establish protected areas (including MCZs) compared with the need for biodiversity protection. ]]]The NSMC has not taken a position on the level of ambition.26 January 2014                                                                                        “A review of private and public sector marine science and evidence needs, the capability of the UK’s private sector marine science and technology sector to meet or support the meeting of those needs, and opportunities for growth”, Marine Planning Consultants, ABPmer and Peter Barham Environmental, 2013&#xa0;