&#xa0;

[[[OAR0011]]]

[[[Written evidence submitted by ]]]

[[[UCU]]]&#xa0;UCU welcomes this opportunity to submit its views on the Ofsted Education Committee.  UCU represents over 40,000 staff working in FE colleges and in prison and community learning services.&#xa0;Following the overly critical and inaccurate positioning of the further education and skills sector in the 2011/12 Ofsted Chief Inspector’s report, UCU is pleased to see that the 2012/13 displays a more nuanced understanding of the sector and its mission.  UCU, however, believes that the current inspection system is flawed. Ofsted inspectors have little experience of teaching in the sector or taught long ago and their most recent experience is more likely to be managerial.  Furthermore, OFSTED is not fit for purpose and is immune to criticism, last year 20% of colleges inspected complained, no complaint was upheld. UCU believes that improvement would be better led by an independent self and peer review body owned and managed by practitioners and responsive to the needs of students, teachers and providers. &#xa0;UCU has a number of concerns arising from the Annual Report and they are summarised below.  &#xa0;Inspection &#xa0;The proportionate and risk-based nature of inspection continues to mean that Ofsted’s observations of the sector will always be a function of the narrow range of providers that are inspected.  Similarly, Ofsted inspections are limited to approximately 40% of a college’s provision and so the annual report is limited in its capacity to present a balanced overview of the sector and its increasingly good and outstanding institutions.  &#xa0;Whilst UCU notes that last year Ofsted increased the number of teaching and learning sessions observed by inspectors, UCU maintains its concerns about the validity of teaching and learning assessments that use lesson observation as the primary mechanism for judgment.  Organisational responses to lesson observations have led to a sharp rise in imposed punitive and draconian changes to internal lesson observation policies. Lesson observations are now the trigger for the largest number of local disputes of any one issue in the FE workplace.&#xa0;As we detailed last year, the college intake varies significantly from that of schools. Colleges cater to a much more diverse student population often with a greater need for educational support. It is our view that the Ofsted Inspection methodology continues to overly focus on qualification success. The over-prioritisation of qualification success fails to recognise moderate achievements by learners. Whilst colleges do their utmost to provide the most appropriate opportunities for their learners, the punitive nature of Ofsted inspection methodology provides perverse incentives for colleges to attempt to boost their success rates by placing learners on courses that do not stretch learners, or by not recruiting learners who may have a further distance to travel on their learning journey. This includes learners who have not been in employment, education or training and learners, learners from low participation backgrounds and learners who have special educational needs and/or disabilities – the very learners that further education colleges are adept at supporting.  &#xa0;Each year, some 50% of learners do not achieve a grade C or above in English and maths, the majority of these learners go on to study at a college. In 2011/12, 40% of learners who took a GCSE in mathematics often as a repeat attained a grade C or above and the corresponding figure for GCSE English was 33%.  This is a feat to be commended, particularly as colleges are only just receiving the resources to attract English and maths teachers.  The bursaries offered for specialist maths and English FE teachers, while very welcome, may not increase the supply to the levels needed because they are only available by a pre-service training route. Furthermore, the more attractive salaries and terms and conditions of service available in the school sector support the sector to neither retain nor attract suitably qualified professionals.  &#xa0;Funding&#xa0;As we detailed last year, the dedication, commitment and good will of teachers and lecturers in the further education sector has limited the impact of severe funding cuts to the sector, however this balance is now at significant risk. Learners, staff and their institutions are plagued with course closures, staff redundancies and contracting provision. The announcement that further education funding for 18-year-olds will be reduced by 17.5 per cent from September 2014 is a further blow to the sector’s ability to effectively support the very learners it is adept at supporting. The Ofsted inspection methodology continues to expect better outcomes despite the infrastructure for learners being decimated.  &#xa0;Offender learning&#xa0;Good teaching, training and assessment are essential to effective learning. Teaching in prisons is a particularly challenging task requiring specialist skills and experience. Our concerns about an over-emphasis on qualification are unfortunately confirmed in the prison education sector where our members report that they are pressed to provide a series of short, low level course that are likely to secure high success rates, but do not do anything to provide real progression for learners.&#xa0;The policy and funding regulations set up an environment which does not support excellence and the Ofsted judgments reflect this.  There is an over-reliance on the use of casualised employed staff, such as part-time hourly paid and a neglect of serious workforce development. As such, the system relies on – and sometimes exploits – the dedication of teachers to their students and their belief in the importance of the work that they do. UCU has also seen aggressive attacks by both private and college providers on the pay and conditions of service of our members working in prisons. This is not a recipe for maintaining a high quality, professional workforce and for attracting new able teachers into this specialism. &#xa0;The uncertainty built into the system by the contract re-tendering process militates against the establishment of a stable employment environment in which expertise can be built up and retained, and in which staff can feel that they have career progression opportunities within prison education and training. UCU would like to see workforce development built into provider contracts and rigorously policed through a compliance regime with real teeth. This should include a requirement both to encourage tutors to undertake continuous professional development, but also to ensure that CPD appropriate to their work is available to them. This is simply not happening at the moment. Our forthcoming report Prison Education: professionalism against the odds reports the findings of research carried out by UCU and the Institute of Education on prison educators’ views on professionalism and practice in the sector.  Respondents detailed how the prison education policy is having a negative impact on the overall quality of education. &#xa0;Employer responsiveness&#xa0;The Ofsted report is also critical of colleges’ responsiveness to local employment needs. Colleges are slowly joining Local Enterprise Partnership boards, however, LEPs abilities to accurately determine and skills priorities and the number of jobs they are likely to create is highly variable, and so UCU is concerned about the strength of Ofsted’s messaging here.   &#xa0;Apprenticeships and skills&#xa0;UCU agrees that too many inadequate apprenticeships have been offered and support measures to improve quality. Apprenticeships should have education at their heart, with mandatory off-site learning providing the necessary opportunity for critical reflection and joining a community of learners. UCU members teaching apprenticeships need time to reconnect with industry and update their professional skills. Our survey of members for the Commission on Adult Vocational Teaching and Learning showed that the pressures of workload and lack of funding mean that they do not always have the opportunity to do so. Addressing this will improve the quality of teaching and learning and ensure apprentices are receiving the most relevant and up to date training possible.January 2014&#xa0;