FBA0023/13-14

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;1.1              The Association of Partnership Practitioners (APP) is a multi-disciplinary organisation whose members advise on partnership law, accounting and taxation, and on the management of professional firms.  Its members include solicitors, barristers, accountants, tax advisers, and bankers.&#xa0;1.2              The tax committee of the APP is pleased to be afforded the opportunity to submit evidence to the Finance Bill sub-committee.&#xa0;1.3              We have focused our response to discuss the context of proposed s863A - C ITTOIA 2005 (the salaried member proposals).  We use this to illustrate our concern about the consultation process.  We trust this will be helpful in your review of the background to the proposed partnership taxation changes and to your parallel review of "new approach to tax policy making".&#xa0;&#xa0;2.1              Limited liability partnerships (LLPs) were introduced as a legal entity in 2000.  The intention was to provide a commercial entity that had some limited liability protection for its members but with the taxation attributes of partnerships.&#xa0;2.2              Partnership taxation treatment is fundamental to LLPs.  If LLPs were taxed as companies the LLP structure would serve limited purpose and many professional firms would operate as limited companies or as traditional partnerships under the 1890 Act.&#xa0;2.3              The original drafting of the tax legislation of LLPs (now s863 ITTOIA 2005) was not consulted upon at the time.  This lack of consultation led to defective legislation that the Government is now trying to correct (and again, in our view, with insufficient consultation).&#xa0;2.4              We understand that the original intention was for LLPs to be taxed as if partnerships, and therefore a member’s tax status would be the same as that within an 1890 Act partnership.  This intention was confirmed by HMRC at paragraph 2.8 in the 20 May 2013 Consultation Document.&#xa0;2.5              ‘Salaried partners’ of an 1890 Act partnership are employees with the title ‘partner’ but who are not partners.  The LLP Act allows for members of an LLP to also be employees.  The tax legislation (through erroneous drafting in our view) conferred self-employed tax status as if true partners on employee members.&#xa0;2.6              Members of our tax committee, and other practitioners, highlighted this anomaly to HMRC at the time and explained that we anticipated that the defects in this legislation would be exploited.  It is frustrating that appropriate debate did not take place over a decade ago, that our predictions have come true (indeed beyond even our expectations), and that in belatedly seeking to take corrective action our advice is again not being fully absorbed by Government.

[[[&#xa0;]]]&#xa0;3.1              We acknowledge that the consultation document published by HMRC on 20 May was the start of what we anticipated being an appropriate consultation process.  We also acknowledge that HMRC were engaged and involving in this process over summer 2013.&#xa0;3.2              Feedback was provided in the consultation process by professional bodies, including ourselves, and some firms potentially affected by the then proposed changes.&#xa0;3.3              We know of many firms who did not respond to the consultation process because they saw that the proposals would have no, or at most little, impact upon them.&#xa0;3.4              Our response was that the proposals were an inappropriate reaction to the problem identified and we recommended that a simple change to Section 863 ITTOIA 2005 was all that was needed to bring the position to that which we had understood was always intended and to ensure that relevant partnership tax case law could be used to determine appropriate outcomes.&#xa0;&#xa0;4.1              On 10 December, some four months after the initial consultation process, the Government published amended proposals within draft clauses for Finance Bill 2014 together with draft HMRC guidance thereon.&#xa0;4.2              The proposals are significantly different to those outlined in the 20 May 2013 consultation document and thus, in our view, should be subject to fresh consultation.&#xa0;4.3              Unfortunately the HMRC ‘technical notes and guidance’ of 10 December make it clear that we have been presented a fait accompli.  "The Government would not expect to make significant changes to the published legislation, although comments on technical details would be welcome."  (Page 3 of HMRC’s Technical Note and Guidance 10 December 2013.)&#xa0;4.4              The impression being strongly given is that there is no intention on the part of Government to debate the principles behind the fresh proposals.&#xa0;4.5              The revised proposals will not catch some employee members who the Government clearly wished to tax as employees within their original proposals.  Under the new proposals it is quite possible the low paid workers referred to in paragraph 2.9 of the 20 May consultation document will under the new proposals be able to remain self-employed if their arrangements are set up so to do.&#xa0;4.6              In contrast there were individuals not intended to be affected by the original proposals, who now may well be.  For example, "junior partners (who) are substantially rewarded by a fixed profit share" where paragraph 2.13 of the 20 May consultation document suggested it would be appropriate for them to remain as self-employed, but who are now potentially to be caught.&#xa0;4.7              Many professional firms with junior members now find that the tax position of those members may well change on 6 April 2014 and they have no opportunity to enter into any meaningful debate about the proposals.&#xa0;4.8              The same is true of firms where members share profits primarily by a percentage of the profits of a division of the firm.  Under the 20 May 2013 document proposals our understanding is that this would be a variable profit share and the individuals would not be classed as salaried members.  The draft Finance Bill clauses completely change the outcome in this regard as a share of a divisions profits is to be classed as ‘disguised salary’ (although clearly variable the problem is that it does not directly vary with the firm’s overall profits, only the divisions).&#xa0;4.9              The timescale of implementation by 6 April 2014 is now so short that those firms who find themselves affected, and previously assumed they would not, find that they have no time to debate the position.  Some quite fundamental principles have changed as we have explained above.  The focus of potentially affected firms is on attempting to minimise the impact of what they believe to be inappropriate change to tax legislation.  With our self-assessment regime they will face interest and penalties for failing to operate PAYE if appropriate on members’ income from 6 April 2014, even though the legislation will not receive Royal Assent until summer 2014 and may change through parliamentary process in the meantime.&#xa0;4.10              For some individual members the proposed legislation even has an impact upon the tax due from them on 31 January 2014.  If they otherwise expect their tax liability for 2013/14 to be lower than for 2012/13 then they are able to make a ‘payment reduction claim’ to reduce their 2013/14 interim payments on account (with the first instalment due on 31 January 2014).  However, if they are treated as ceasing self-employment on 5 April 2014 on becoming a salaried member on 6 April 2014 (see 4.12 below) they might have a higher 2013/14 tax liability as a result, and would then be liable to interest on what then proves to be an underpaid first instalment of tax due on 31&#xa0;January 2014.&#xa0;4.11              Where an individual has sufficient capital in the firm on 6 April 2014 they will be able to continue to be treated as self-employed.  Currently the draft legislation insists that any capital commitment made to the firm only counts to the extent it is paid in to the firm by the relevant date.  Banks are already warning that they face administrative difficulty in processing demand from individual members for additional loans to subscribe capital by Friday 4 April 2014 (the last working day before 6 April).  Is it right that a bank’s ability to process applications should determine an individual’s tax status?  (We have suggested to HMRC that a ‘window of opportunity’ be given for the committed capital to be paid in.)&#xa0;4.12              The draft Finance Bill clauses clearly treat salaried members as employees for tax purposes from 6 April 2014.  The HMRC guidance does not explain whether self-employment status is deemed to cease on 5 April 2014 or on 6 April 2014.  In tax terms this is not a difference of a day but of a whole year.  Does one cease in 2013/14 or in 2014/15?&#xa0;4.13              In drafting the proposed new legislation HMRC faced a choice of adopting our recommendation (to bring existing partnership case law into play with a minor redrafting of existing Clause 863) or drafting fresh legislation with a series of tests.  They have chosen the latter.&#xa0;4.14              A potential advantage of tests within legislation is that taxpayers can interpret their own position with some certainty.  However, to do so the tests need to be clear and appropriate.  There has not been an opportunity to debate whether they are.&#xa0;4.15              HMRC have kindly indicated that they welcome comment on their draft guidance such that it might be clarified and expanded where necessary.  We welcome this engagement and have already been liaising directly with HMRC on this.&#xa0;4.16              However, this again highlights that all is being done in a rush.  Firms have to fully absorb both the draft legislation and the draft guidance well in advance of 6 April 2014 so that may they may understand their position at that date and act accordingly.&#xa0;4.17              Our liaison with HMRC has indicated that they hope to publish updated guidance in mid or late February, which will only be six weeks or so in advance of the implementation date.&#xa0;4.18              Given the uncertainty firms face, one would expect that they would be able to obtain detailed guidance in respect of their own circumstances from the otherwise laudable HMRC non-statutory clearance team.  Unfortunately the non-statutory clearance team are only able to respond to clients’ requests once the new rules have Royal Assent, which is likely to be three months after the date on which firms need to have commenced complying with the proposals.&#xa0;4.19              We have the unsatisfactory position of firms being in limbo in determining their position and considering any action in the light of proposed legislation that might change.  For example, HMRC have verbally indicated that they agree that Section 863B (6) does not define the correct period to measure "disguised salary" for the capital measure test in Condition C and that the clause will need correcting.  This is a key definition of one of the tests that firms need to measure by 6 April 2014.&#xa0;&#xa0;5.1              We agree that the existing legislation is defective and needs amendment.&#xa0;5.2              We do not believe that the current proposals are the appropriate corrective action.&#xa0;5.3              We do not believe that there has been adequate consultation on the proposals contained within the draft legislation.&#xa0;5.4              We recommend that a further consultation process should be undertaken with a delay in the introduction of legislation by a year so that there is time to get it right.&#xa0;January 2014