&#xa0;&#xa0;The current UK Government policy on career advice for young people is having a direct impact on the current levels of youth unemployment. By limiting access to unbiased information and placing responsibility on schools as well as businesses to provide career advice, young people are not receiving the necessary impartial, diverse and clear information to make an informed choice about the possible options available to them thus limiting their future. Placing career advice primarily online is likely to have a particularly devastating effect on young people from socially disadvantaged backgrounds, as they potentially do not have the support from families with the knowledge and connections to help.

[[[&#xa0;]]]

[[[Key Points]]]

[[[Poor access to quality, independent information]]]&#xa0;In recent years, the Government has taken the decision to cut funding for Connexions. Secretary of State, Michael Gove MP, told the Education Committee on 18 December 2013 that “Connexions was appalling…” and later said: “there is a lot of garbage talked about career advice from self-interested sources”. He appeared to flatly refuse to accept that the current situation regarding career advice has gone from bad to worse. &#xa0;The Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission suggests “the chickens have come home to roost” as a result of the current policy. It specifically identifies the UK Government’s significant reduction in spending on careers advice as one of the significant impacts on social mobility. It urges:&#xa0; “…the Government to better resource career advice… the Commission is very concerned that, following the devolution of responsibility for careers advice to schools, three-quarters are failing to provide an adequate service. Government has devolved the responsibilities without devolving the resources to enable schools to provide good careers advice to pupils.” &#xa0;The funding cuts to career advice have lead to erosion in the quality and quantity of information available; as well as the removal of face-to-face advice. Ofsted found that three quarters of schools’ career advice is poor.&#xa0;Young people now must rely heavily on their parents for career advice. Parents cannot be expected to know and understand all the options available, and is possibly biased by their own personal opinions and experience and can influence their child’s choice. The Commission further highlights the discrepancy between better off families and poorer families:&#xa0;“Government has devolved the responsibilities without devolving the resources to enable schools to provide good careers advice to pupils. Whereas better-off families tend to have the connections and networks to make informed decisions, poorer families don’t always share the same advantages.” &#xa0;The sole mission of Moving On magazine is to provide a wide range of career information. This publication is in print, as well as an on-line, to address the way young people use the Internet. It is intended to be taken home from school to be shared between parent and child, and to be used in schools as a working document in lessons discussing careers and/or qualifications.&#xa0;Despite being a commercial organisation, we take a strict editorial line with the information we provide to young people. Having been a college lecturer for nearly ten years, a mother of three teenage sons and a Director Governor at our local academy school (which includes a sixth form), I take very seriously our obligation to provide independent, quality, up-to-date information. We work closely with all Sector Skills Councils to give information on a wide range of careers that young people, their parents or even teachers may not know. It important that careers are presented in an appealing and non-patronising way. This may include providing information about unfamiliar careers or industries that may be perceived as neither exciting nor desirable to young people. It takes skill to present a career in facilities management as one that can be creative and fulfilling. But when industries like this, which have an aging work force and considerable amount of opportunities available for progression, it is essential that we carefully explain what exactly is involved and what those opportunities are. This simply cannot be delivered online. &#xa0;

[[[Digital Divide]]]&#xa0;It has long been recognised that the ‘digital divide’ is creating a widening gulf between poorer young people and those from better off families. The impact is two fold when looking at careers advice: one, access to the information which is currently predominantly on-line is difficult when there is no internet available at home; and two, young people need one-to-one support when investigating career options. It is not enough for schools and the Government to simply put up websites without even letting young people know they exist or to put any obligation on schools to make sure young people are even accessing this information.&#xa0;Although 99% of 16 to 24 years old use the Internet , it is what they are using it for that is interesting. In 2013, 16 – 24 year olds were primarily focussing accessing social networks, but only 33% used the Internet to look for information about education, training or course offers. Again, as a mother three teenage sons, as well mentoring hundreds of young people over the years at College, I can attest that it takes considerable active effort to get young people to focus on using the Internet for anything other than accessing social networks. &#xa0;A recent report produced by Barnardo’s, Helping the inbetweeners: Ensuring careers advice improves the options for all young people, describes the views of young people that Barnardo’s work with, found that “young people are not as digitally competent as it is so often perceived. Web and telephone support can only be part of the solution – they need to be made more accessible for young people and policy makers must recommend they are most effectively used in conjunction with adult support.” &#xa0;School is not an environment that many young people from disadvantaged backgrounds either trust or enjoy. One of conclusions drawn is that the replacement of face-to-face services with remote online or telephone-based services is wholly inadequate. &#xa0;In 2012, the Government cut ‘on-the-ground’ services and replaced it with the National Careers Service (providing information on-line and a telephone service for everyone 16+) and seed-funded Plotr (a website). None of the young people that Barnardo’s interviewed in August 2013 had heard of either. I know personally from working with young people, they find websites such as the National Career Service and UCAS overwhelming and very difficult to navigate. Compound this with limited knowledge of what to search for or how to start, it makes for a completely ineffective solution.&#xa0;Moving On magazine is available as a subscription to schools, colleges and sixth forms, so they can provide enough copies for their students to each have an individual copy. Despite pricing for a subscription kept at cost, sadly, over 60% of the enquiries we have are not converted because they do not have the funds. Schools clearly have the need for material to give their students and have told us they use the magazine as a working document – in the classroom, careers evenings and to take home to share with parents. There is no doubt the demand is there for more than a hyperlink. In fact, many of our school subscribers have sent us unsolicited messages to say that they are struggling to provide their students with any kind of literature to take home or that they can use in the classroom to discuss with students. &#xa0;In addition to school subscribers, Sector Skills Councils, with whom we work closely, take bulk copies to hand out at career events. Universities also take bulk copies to give out at UCAS events and Open Days.&#xa0;Telling young people to simply search online independently for information about their career and qualifications options, simply does not take into account how young people operate. Compound this with the fact that young people from poorer backgrounds are likely to be less experienced or capable with conducting independent research, the options found will be limited, if at all.&#xa0;

[[[Apprenticeships or university?]]]&#xa0;Whilst there may be a dearth of some jobs in some industries, young people need to be educated about exactly what that means and how best to respond. The National Apprenticeship Service website provides a considerable amount of information, but again, it is very difficult to navigate without support. It is also important to understand that, although the two main industries that have a significant number of apprenticeship vacancies are engineering and construction, they may not offer the type of career that a young person wants to do. &#xa0;Michael Gove said in his answers to questions #AskGove, that “of all the tragic things happening in education system at the moment, too many people doing A-Levels is not one of them”. This comment demonstrates the Government’s general lack of concern on whether young people are actually prepared in a way that is beneficial or suitable. &#xa0;When addressing the Education Committee about Careers Guidance for Young People, EngineeringUK stated:&#xa0;“Access to a website alone is not going to encourage those pupils who perform well in maths and sciences to discover the possibilities of careers in engineering. Given that pursuing engineering at university requires specific A level subjects, and for apprenticeships and college routes solid maths and science results, a website may not equip them to make informed career choices either.” &#xa0;Our team at Moving On deal with a wide range of organisations that wish to reach young people. This includes: traineeship and apprenticeship providers, colleges, universities and corporates looking to recruit young people. All are happy to be represented amongst the others because they want young people to choose to join them well informed about the direction they are taking. It is no good investing time and funds in a new recruit or student, only to have them leave because it was not the right choice. Knowing what is involved at the start is crucial. Whilst Michael Gove does not see a problem with all young people doing A-Levels, however businesses, universities and apprenticeship providers do. It is often reported to us that it is expensive and time-consuming taking a young person on board only to find they do not have a full understanding to what they are committing. &#xa0;

[[[Conflict of interest]]]&#xa0;The single biggest issue raised by the Government policy to devolve the responsibility to schools to provide independent career advice is the funding. If a school, college or sixth form is told it must provide independent career advice, but it receives its funding by keeping “bums on seats” in their sixth form, they will clearly have a difficult decision to make. For example, currently schools receive approximately £4,500 per young person on their register in their sixth form. If a school with a sixth form with, say, 1,500 students and 10% take the advice to go to the local college that would mean they would lose nearly £675,000 of funding. Whatever the moral fibre of a Head Teacher to do the best by their students, this would be a difficult call to make.&#xa0;The Association of Colleges’ president, Michele Sutton, told the BBC of its concerns that schools are not providing impartial advice and that young people are actively being steered towards staying in the school’s sixth form: “They end up in the wrong institution, usually school sixth forms, doing the wrong course, and recently published Education Funding Agency data shows that schools lose 50% of their pupils between year 11 and year 13. How many end up not in education, employment and training.”  Paul Jackson, CEO of Engineering UK, told the Education Committee “if Ofsted are not overseeing it and grading it, or if it is not appearing in a league table, then it will not get those hours.” &#xa0;During my time as a college lecturer, I personally saw the impact that the closing of Connexions has had. The responsibility of giving career advice fell directly on the lecturers with little or no training. Many did not have any experience of giving career advice. It adds pressure and strain on already overstretched timetables. As a School Governor, I have also seen the pressure this has had on several schools and discussed it with Governors from further afield. As there is no obligation to provide career advice, many schools have provided as little as possible – for funding reasons and to avoid the added aggravation.&#xa0;Gil Howarth, CEO of the National Skills Academies, told me he was very worried that schools will not encourage their students to take up an apprenticeship. The industries, such as the railway engineering and construction, are crying out for recruits, but most young people are unaware of the opportunities available. There is a perception problem about what the work might entail and schools are unable or unwilling to provide the necessary information. Representatives from large corporates in the construction and engineering industries told me that they have even been effectively prevented access by some schools.&#xa0;As Graham Stuart MP said: “Ministers assume that schools will always do the best thing for the children in their care but, in reality, schools will deliver what they are measured on.”&#xa0;

[[[Businesses to provide careers advice]]]&#xa0;The Government has made it clear that it wants career advice to come primarily from businesses. Real-life contact with the world of work is an excellent way to find out more about what working in different industries is like. However, the reality of putting this into place in a well-rounded and effective way is very difficult. There is no obligation on businesses to provide this service. Whilst large organisations have HR departments to plan and deliver career days and talks, often SMEs have neither the time nor resources to do so. Vince Cable recently admitted there has been “very low up-take” of apprenticeships citing there is an issue around minimum wage being too low to entice apprentices, but if it’s raised it will no longer be attractive to SMEs. &#xa0;On the other side of the coin, schools that need their students to stay on in their sixth form have been known to do the minimum of their obligation to actively engage with employers offering traineeships and apprenticeships, as well as colleges offering vocational courses. The Science and Technology Committee has found that some girl schools do not invite in engineering firms perpetuating the impression that it isn’t an industry for women.&#xa0;January 2014&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; Committee, E. (2012, October 30). Careers Guidance for Young People. London, Westminster, UK: Parliamentary copyright. Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission. State of the Nation 2013: social mobility and child poverty in Great Britain. Parliament. London: UK Government. Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission. State of the Nation 2013: social mobility and child poverty in Great Britain. Parliament. London: UK Government. Office for National Statistics. (2013). Internet Access Quarterly Update, Q3 2013. London: Office for National Statistics Office for National Statistics. (2013). Internet Access - Households and Individuals, 2013. London: Office for National Statistics. Ralling, J. E. (2013). Helping the inbetweeners: Ensuring careers advice improves the options for all young people. Barnardo's. Ilford: Barnardo's Education Committee. (2012, October 30). Careers Guidance for Young People. London, Westminster, UK: Parliamentary copyright. Coughlan, S. (2013, Nov 18). Careers advice' appalling, says college leader. Retrieved Jan 25, 2014 from BBC News - Educations and Family: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-24988338 Education Committee, Careers guidance for young people; The impact of the new duty on schools. Parliament. 2013: Education Committee. Newcombe, T. (2013, 12 18). Vince Cable; SMEs need more help with apprenticeships. Retrieved 01 25, 2014 from HR Magazine: http://www.hrmagazine.co.uk/hro/news/1141195/vince-cable-smes-help-apprenticeships&#xa0;